
--- [PAGE 1] ---
Article
A Conceptual Framework to Support Digital
Transformation in Manufacturing Using an Integrated
Business Process Management Approach
Javaid Butt
School of Engineering and Built Environment, Anglia Ruskin University, Chelmsford CM1 1SQ, Essex, UK;
javaid.butt@anglia.ac.uk
Received: 31 May 2020; Accepted: 23 June 2020; Published: 27 June 2020


Abstract: Digital transformation is no longer a future trend, as it has become a necessity for
businesses to grow and remain competitive in the market. The fourth industrial revolution, called
Industry 4.0, is at the heart of this transformation, and is supporting organizations in achieving
beneﬁts that were unthinkable a few years ago. The impact of Industry 4.0 enabling technologies
in the manufacturing sector is undeniable, and their correct use oﬀers beneﬁts such as improved
productivity and asset performance, reduced ineﬃciencies, lower production and maintenance costs,
while enhancing system agility and ﬂexibility. However, organizations have found the move towards
digital transformation extremely challenging for several reasons, including a lack of standardized
implementation protocols, emphasis on the introduction of new technologies without assessing
their role within the business, the compartmentalization of digital initiatives from the rest of the
business, and the large-scale implementation of digitalization without a realistic view of return on
investment. To instill conﬁdence and reduce the anxiety surrounding Industry 4.0 implementation in
the manufacturing sector, this paper presents a conceptual framework based on business process
management (BPM). The framework is informed by a content-centric literature review of Industry 4.0
technologies, its design principles, and BPM method. This integrated framework incorporates the
factors that are often overlooked during digital transformation and presents a structured methodology
that can be employed by manufacturing organizations to facilitate their transition towards Industry 4.0.
Keywords: business process management; Industry 4.0; design principles; lean six sigma; change
management; skills gap analysis; digital transformation
1. Introduction
Digital transformation is characterized by the use of emerging and frequently changing digital
technologies to solve speciﬁc issues. It is quickly becoming a top priority for organizations worldwide,
and, especially during the pandemic of COVID-19, the planning phases have accelerated signiﬁcantly,
as organizations can now practically assess the adverse impact of not having embedded digital
technologies. The role of Industry 4.0, enabling technologies to support digital transformation,
was an intensive research area before COVID-19, but this pandemic has expedited the eﬀorts to
ensure better strategies are available to realize the full beneﬁts of Industry 4.0. The focus has shifted
drastically from digitization (conversion of data to digital form) to digitalization that is focused on the
‘organizational process’ or ‘business process’ of the technologically-induced change within industries,
organizations, and markets [1]. The digitalization of manufacturing industries has enabled new
production processes using the key technology trends of Industry 4.0 and its design principles [2,3],
as shown in Figure 1.
Designs 2020, 4, 17; doi:10.3390/designs4030017
www.mdpi.com/journal/designs

--- [PAGE 2] ---
Designs 2020, 4, 17
2 of 39
 
Figure 1. Industry 4.0 technology trends and design principles.
The major issues with the adoption of digital techniques and Industry 4.0 initiatives can be
summarized as a lack of readiness, with organizations not being able to realistically perceive the
beneﬁts on oﬀer [4,5]. Technology and innovation management are useful organizational strategies,
but the problem comes when there is low awareness or lack of knowledge pertaining to the speciﬁc
Industry 4.0 technologies that require management [6,7]. People, in general, fear the unknown and
resist change. These anxieties become ampliﬁed when the positive impacts of Industry 4.0 come to light.
The use of Industry 4.0 enabling technologies has resulted in improved productivity and eﬃciency,
increased knowledge sharing and collaborative working, ﬂexibility and agility, easier compliance with
regulations, better customer experience, reduced costs, and higher revenues [8]. This has fascinated
some, but has scared most, as there is uncertainty around job security and future implications for
people and organizations alike. Therefore, it becomes crucial to devise an organization-wide strategy
for digital transformation. Unfortunately, the role of digital technologies in business transformation
is under-investigated [9]. The main issues include an inability to correctly identify the targeted
performance objectives and a lack of leadership capacities. This results in Industry 4.0 projects being
designed as cost-driven initiatives that are unable to provide or support any real business model
transformation [10,11]. There are concentrated eﬀorts where digital technologies are being used to
transform manufacturing value chains from research and development, supply chain, and factory
operations to marketing, sales, and service. This requires processing large data sets for informed
decision making using the Internet of Things (Section 2.5) and big data analytics (Section 2.6).
Digital connectivity among designers, managers, workers, consumers, and physical industrial assets
can unlock enormous value and provide signiﬁcant beneﬁts [12]. To ensure connectivity, it is critical
to understand the interface between diﬀerent business processes, to correctly identify the required
Industry 4.0 enabling technologies and ensure the development of an organization-wide approach that
can add value for customers and for internal processes [13,14].
Governments of diﬀerent countries have also taken notice of the impact of Industry 4.0 and
have developed plans to take advantage of the opportunities. There is, however, a diﬀerence in

--- [PAGE 3] ---
Designs 2020, 4, 17
3 of 39
approaches. For example, European countries and the USA are focused on developing business and
standardization models [15–18], and countries like Japan, Germany, and China are implementing
digitalization, to increase eﬃciency and product quality, as well as to reduce costs [19,20]. On the other
hand, the Australian government has signed a cooperation agreement with Germany’s Industrie 4.0
platform, to research reference architectures, standards, test laboratories, as well as the development
of education and training resources [21]. Such eﬀorts indicate the need for developing strategic and
technological roadmaps that can facilitate the digital transformation of organizations. There are several
examples in the literature where strategic plans have been conceptualized, developed, and implemented
to varying degrees of success, based on lean six sigma-models [22,23], business process management
models [24,25], a maturity level-based model [26], and an outcome-based business model [27]. However,
they lack the emphasis on some key aspects, such as the streamlining of business processes after
implementation, workforce skills gap identiﬁcation, and eﬀective change management protocols.
This paper aims to oﬀer an integrative business process management framework that can be
used as a reference model by academics and manufacturing organizations, in their journey towards
a successful transition from traditional manufacturing to Industry 4.0. It incorporates the key factors
that are often overlooked in Industry 4.0 implementation and presents a synergistic plan to address
them. Having a deep understanding of Industry 4.0 enabling technologies and its design principles is
a prerequisite for devising an implementation plan. Therefore, Section 2 presents a review of Industry
4.0 key technology trends and Section 3 presents an overview of its design principles. Section 4 is focused
on business process management whereas Section 5 presents the conceptualization and complete
breakdown of the proposed integrated business process management framework. The discussion in
Section 5 is centered around the phases and the associated challenges that manufacturing organizations
may face while transitioning into Industry 4.0—enabled digital enterprises.
2. Key Technology Trends of Industry 4.0
2.1. Additive Manufacturing
This is an umbrella term that encompasses a group of technologies capable of manufacturing
three-dimensional objects by adding layers on top of each other, using diﬀerent materials based
on a computer-aided design ﬁle of a product [28–32]. Additive manufacturing (AM) technologies
have become the top choice for the manufacture of complex geometries, with intricate features in
several industries, including automotive, aerospace, and medical [33,34]. AM methods excel at the
development of porous/hollow parts with improved aesthetics, increased surface area, heat transfer
(lattice structures), and mass customisation [35,36]. Furthermore, numerical simulation methods have
helped in identifying the optimal processing parameters that can help in the production of bespoke
products eﬃciently [37–39]. The impact of AM can be evidenced through the response of the AM
community to support medical professionals, by providing products in mass quantities ranging from
PPE such as face masks, and medical device components such as ventilator valves and swab testing kits,
as well as ecosystem components such as hands-free door openers. AM has emerged as a supply chain
enabler during this crisis, by not only providing essential products, but also by connecting designers
and manufacturers to healthcare professionals through scientiﬁc data sharing protocols [40]. AM is
a key player when it comes to product customization, design ﬂexibility, time and cost-eﬀectiveness,
and reducing the total number of parts through part consolidation [41].
2.2. Augmented Reality
The development activities of augmented reality (AR) date back to the 1960s, when researchers
developed a see-through display to show 3D graphics in a helmet [42]. AR is often used in conjunction
with virtual reality (VR) to oﬀer unique solutions [43–45]. AR augments 3D graphics in a real-world
environment, whereas VR is an artiﬁcial environment that is created with software and presented
to the user in a way that the user accepts it as a real environment [46]. AR is being adopted at

--- [PAGE 4] ---
Designs 2020, 4, 17
4 of 39
an accelerated rate by the manufacturing sector for a multitude of reasons. Commonly used AR
protocols include AR markers [47] and mobile devices [48], as well as hologram [49], tracking [50],
and interaction technologies [51]. AR is beneﬁtting the manufacturing sector by providing better
insights for product development, equipment maintenance, workforce training, production ﬂoor issues,
process ﬂow, and quality assurance [52,53]. AR has also been widely adopted by the medical sector.
The work done by Wake et al. [54] in the ﬁeld of medicine and healthcare showed a workﬂow for
additive manufacturing a kidney and developing AR models, using radiology examination and image
segmentation. An AR kidney model was created using Unity 3D software and deployed to a Microsoft
HoloLens. The AM kidney and AR models were used preoperatively and intraoperatively to assist in
robotic partial nephrectomy. This technique demonstrated the reliability and feasibility of the AM/AR
combination that can inﬂuence surgical planning decisions for better results. The use of AR has also
beneﬁtted the education, automotive, retail, ﬁnance, and tourism sectors [55–58].
2.3. Simulation and Modelling Techniques
They serve an extremely useful purpose by providing a visual representation of a product or
process, and showing the eﬀects of diﬀerent conditions in a virtual environment. They not only save
costs by optimizing the geometry or process ﬂow features, but can also predict future states based
on diﬀerent mathematical models. Simulations can be used for a product, process, or process ﬂow,
and there are several software packages available for them. Products and manufacturing processes
are normally simulated based on the ﬁnite element method, ﬁnite volume method, and discrete
element method. Software packages capable of using such methods include CAEplex, MATLAB,
Ansys, OpenFOAM, and EMS. On the other hand, manufacturing-process-ﬂow simulation packages
are based on various modeling paradigms, including process-centric, systems dynamics, Petri net,
Monte Carlo simulations, and agent-based. These packages include, but are not limited to, WITNESS,
AnyLogic, FlexSim, Simio, and Simul8 Professional. They can provide animated and interactive models
to replicate the operation of an existing or proposed production facility. They can help solve common
manufacturing challenges that include assessing the impact of investment, production planning,
optimization, and scheduling, facility designing, manufacturing capability planning, bottleneck
analysis, and resource allocation [59–61].
2.4. Autonomous Robots
The demand for industrial robots in manufacturing has been on the rise for several years now
because of their beneﬁts e.g., lower defect rate, higher quality, enhanced reliability, reduced waste,
and better ﬂoor space utilization, making them indispensable to world-class manufacturers [62].
This has also given rise to ‘cobots’, or collaborative robots that work closely with humans and augment
their capabilities. According to the International Federation of Robotics [63], there are four types of
collaborative manufacturing applications, i.e., co-existence (human and robot work together, but no
shared space), sequential collaboration (human and robot work together on a part separately, but not
at the same time), co-operation (human and robot operating at the same time on a part or machine),
and responsive collaboration (robot responds to the human movements in real-time). Cobots are
designed to ﬁll the gaps between conventional robots and human specialists leading to new territories
for automation. Cobots are intended to work in manners like people, with the additional capacity to
analyze and transmit information [64]. In Industry 4.0, robots and people work collaboratively on
interlinking tasks, by utilizing smart sensor human-machine interfaces. The utilization of robots is
extending to incorporate diﬀerent capacities, such as manufacturing, coordination, data management,
remote access, and control [65]. These are extremely useful features that oﬀer ﬂexibility to the users
and allow for the seamless integration of the physical equipment with digital software tools [66].

--- [PAGE 5] ---
Designs 2020, 4, 17
5 of 39
2.5. Internet of Things
Internet of Things (IoT) is a system of interconnected devices implanted with sensors, software,
and electronics to initiate the exchange and collation of data [67]. In the manufacturing industry, it is
referred to as the Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT), which facilitates communication among people,
products, and machines. Manufacturers are attaching sensors to machines, and other physical assets
on the production ﬂoor, to collate data that inﬂuence decisions in real-time and lead to increased
eﬃciency as well as productivity [68]. The interconnectedness of diﬀerent devices allows for a better
user experience and helps in eﬀective decision making [69]. IIoT systems are conceived as a layered
modular architecture of digital technology with four layers, i.e., device, network, service, and content.
The device layer refers to sensors or machines. The network layer comprises physical network buses,
cloud computing, and communication protocols. The service layer manipulates and combines the
data into information that can be displayed, and the content layer refers to the user interface devices,
such as tablets and screens [70]. The enormous data captured through IIoT helps organizations in
establishing clear objectives and enables them in understanding their systems better, by providing
insights that were scarce before. It can create a digital network that keeps the entire organization
connected, thus promoting collaboration and enabling the use of other key Industry 4.0 technologies
eﬀectively [71]. The rise of 5G has also boosted the adoption of IIoT, as the advantages will increase
exponentially. 5G enabled IIoT systems will accelerate the realization of Industry 4.0, with high-speed,
low-latency, and large-volume data transfers [72].
2.6. Big Data Analytics
The copious amounts of data collated by IIoT need to be analyzed through protocols that can
help make sense of the data and use it for decision making. This is where big data analytics (BDA)
come into play. ‘Big data’ refers to a collection of massive data sets that cannot be analyzed through
conventional means. There are four types of data, i.e., structured, semi-structured, quasi-structured,
and unstructured. This is also the order in which the amount of data and complexity in analysis
increases drastically [73]. Based on the data, four types of analytics can be performed. The ﬁrst is
descriptive, that provides an eﬀective visualization of the current business. The second is diagnostic,
that helps to identify the causes of problems. Predictive is the third, that makes use of historical data
and algorithms to predict future business needs. The last is prescriptive, that recommends actions and
strategies based on advanced analytical tools [74]. Diﬀerent BDA tools are available on the market
(e.g., Xplenty, Skytree, Talend, Lumify); they can provide a meaningful analysis of a large set of data.
BDA can enable manufacturers to improve their asset eﬃciency and performance, enhance product
customization, better administrate predictive maintenance and prevent asset breakdowns, as well as
streamline production processes and supply chain management initiatives more eﬀectively [75].
2.7. Cloud Computing
Data collation through IIoT and analysis through BDA require both hardware and software
capabilities for data processing. These costs can limit the applicability of Industry 4.0 technologies,
and cloud computing (CC) can help alleviate some of that burden by removing the need for sophisticated
hardware and undertaking data analysis over cloud servers. The U.S. National Institute of Standards
and Technology (NIST) deﬁned cloud computing as a model for enabling convenient, on-demand
network access to a shared pool of conﬁgurable computing resources (e.g., networks, servers, storage,
applications, and services) that can be rapidly provisioned and released with minimal management
eﬀort or cloud provider interaction [76]. Organizations are rapidly shifting their IT resources to
CC, due to the beneﬁts on oﬀer, including reduced capital costs, global scale, high speed, reliability,
enhanced productivity, performance, and security [77]. CC operates in four diﬀerent types, i.e., public
cloud (third party cloud service providers), private cloud (resources used exclusively by a single
organization), hybrid cloud (a combination of public and private), and community cloud (shared

--- [PAGE 6] ---
Designs 2020, 4, 17
6 of 39
by several organizations) [78]. CC enables the integration of distributed manufacturing resources
and the establishment of a collaborative and ﬂexible infrastructure across geographically distributed
manufacturing and service sites [79]. This could lead to cloud manufacturing being the next generation
manufacturing paradigm [80].
2.8. Cybersecurity
The ﬂow of enormous data sets in and out of an organization over the Internet makes cybersecurity
(CS) a key element of Industry 4.0. There is a growing demand to secure critical industrial frameworks
and manufacturing lines from CS threats, to protect interconnected systems. Data can be of diﬀerent
types, ranging from individual data to production ﬂoor plans, and new product designs to future
initiatives. It is critical for some sectors (e.g., defense ministry) to ensure that their data do not fall into
the wrong hands, as they can be misused on a public forum or can sabotage the business. Theft of
individual data from the databases of organizations is also quite common. Prime examples are the cases
of Facebook [81] and Cambridge Analytica [82]. Therefore, there are data protection rules all over the
world, such as the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) from the European Union and the UK
Data Protection Act 2018. They outline the regulations for personal data handling and precautionary
measures. There is also a need for the standardization of CS protocols, to instill conﬁdence in a user
organization. The most common ones are ISO/IEC 27001 and 27002, part of the ISO/IEC 27000 family
of standards published by the International Organization for Standardization and the International
Electrotechnical Commission [83].
2.9. Horizontal and Vertical Integration
Horizontal and vertical integration aims to develop organization-wide strategies for information
sharing, to create the basis for an automated supply and value chain. Horizontal integration is about
digitalization across the full value and supply chain, focusing on data exchanges and connected
information systems. It allows for the seamless integration of IT systems and information ﬂows
across production and business planning procedures, that range from suppliers of materials and
utilities to distributors and customers [84]. Horizontal integration helps with horizontal coordination,
collaboration, cost savings, value creation, speed, and the possibilities to create horizontal ecosystems
of value, based on information. On the other hand, vertical integration creates a comprehensive
solution by integrating IT systems at various hierarchical production and manufacturing levels.
These hierarchical levels include the ﬁeld level (interfacing with the production process via sensors and
actuators), the control level (regulation of both machines and systems), the production process level (to
be monitored and controlled), the operations level (production planning and quality management)
and the enterprise planning level (order management and processing). Combining these two is key to
a truly digitized future for organizations [85,86].
2.10. Cyber-Physical Systems
Cyber-physical systems (CPS) are systems of collaborating computational entities that
are in intensive connection with the surrounding physical world and its on-going processes,
providing and using data-accessing, as well as data-processing services available on the Internet,
concurrently [87]. CPS is usually based on a 5C architecture of connection, conversion, cyber, cognition,
and conﬁguration [88]. However, it has been extended to include customer, content, and coalition [89].
CPS is interconnected between the physical factory ﬂoor and the cyber computational space. With the
help of BDA, they help in comprehending trends and supporting informed decision making in
real-time [90]. CPS is the future of the manufacturing sector, as it can work for products and processes
alike. The challenges lie in the use of appropriate tools and analysis techniques that can provide useful
insights to develop an action plan. CPS mainly comprises three components i.e., communication and
computation as well as control, and handling as well as monitoring [91,92]. The use of CPS aims to
increase the implementation of large-scale systems, improving the adaptability, autonomy, eﬃciency,

--- [PAGE 7] ---
Designs 2020, 4, 17
7 of 39
functionality, reliability, safety, and usability of such systems [93]. These systems are being applied to
diverse areas, such as cyber manufacturing, smart energy systems, and smart factory [94,95].
2.11. Cyber Manufacturing
Cyber manufacturing (CM) is a concept derived from CPS and refers to a system that oﬀers
an information-transparent environment, to facilitate asset management, provide reconﬁgurability,
and maintain productivity. It involves data conversion from interconnected systems into predictive
and prescriptive operations to achieve resilient performance [96]. The enabling technologies of
CM include IoT, BDA, and CPS. Its challenges include a lack of standardization protocols for
seamless connectivity [97], extracting actionable data to avoid disconnected analytics [98], and CS [99].
The beneﬁts on oﬀer from CM are quite signiﬁcant, especially for organizations with multi-scale,
complex, and networked assets, as they can maintain productivity by reducing unexpected downtime
and reconﬁguring production assets based on their health status, leading to resilient manufacturing
systems. Manufacturing services are communicated to both users and consumers, who access those
services via various channels [100]. Manufacturing software should be deployed in the cloud to enable
the oﬀering of such services. Manufacturing services should be deployed in various models, including
the public, private, community, and hybrid clouds (Section 2.7). Each cloud can provide customers
with diﬀerent services. For example, the customer can ﬁnd the required product oﬀers in a public cloud,
and an organization employee can ﬁnd services and infrastructure provided from their organization or
its speciﬁed service provider in a private cloud. BDA will be used to oﬀer the best services to satisfy
consumer requirements and expectations [101]. The use of CPS in manufacturing is referred to as CPPS
(cyber-physical production systems), and this concept is slowly gaining momentum from academia
and industries alike [102,103].
3. Industry 4.0 Design Principles
3.1. Modularity
It refers to the design of system components and is characterized by the capability of system
components to be removed or added in an eﬃcient manner [104], leading to agile manufacturing
systems rather than linear ones [105]. This feature is extremely beneﬁcial when dealing with ﬂuctuating
production orders, customized product development, or incorporating new technologies [106].
System components are loosely coupled and can be reconﬁgured on a plug-and-play principle [107].
This design feature allows the system to rapidly integrate required modules to quickly respond to
customers’ requirements and overcome internal system malfunctions by enabling the interchangeability
of modules [108]. Modularity builds on the agile supply chain, ﬂexible material ﬂow systems, modular
decision-making procedures, and ﬂexible processes [109], by allowing the application of module
machine tools, workstations, material handling equipment, and reconﬁgurable tools [101].
3.2. Interoperability
Embracing and implementing new technologies will have limited impact if contextual information
cannot be shared among machines, objects, and people. Establishing connectivity through the use of
digital techniques such as IoT, BDA, and cloud computing should allow an open exchange of information
between systems, to help businesses reduce the costs of information collection and management [110].
This aspect has paved the way for the design principle of interoperability that is deﬁned as the exchange
of data among systems through the use of Industry 4.0 enabling technologies [2]. Interoperability in
Industry 4.0 can be deﬁned in four diﬀerent levels, i.e., operational, semantic, systematical, and technical
interoperability [111]. Interoperability is diﬀerent from data standardization, as it focuses on contextual
information and the interaction of diﬀerent system components to communicate and understand the
information for decision making [112]. Interoperability enables applications, such as standard and

--- [PAGE 8] ---
Designs 2020, 4, 17
8 of 39
secure communication, sharing meaningful information, collaborative behaviour, embedded systems,
and CPS operation [101].
3.3. Decentralization
This is a popular concept that organizations have been embracing for years and allows independent
operations as well as autonomous decisions through various components in a system rather than
a centralized system, enabling ﬂexibility and adaptability [104]. These decisions are made in real-time
and in compliance with the organizational objectives. CPS and digital twins are among the key
enablers of decentralization [113]. Organizations beneﬁt from decentralization, as employees only
need to interfere in case of a problem, and they can spend their time on other productive activities,
which will increase the overall eﬀectiveness in responding to individual and customized orders [114,115].
Cloud computing can be considered as a form of decentralization [116], and additive manufacturing
systems have been enabling organizations to operate small, decentralized factories for years. This aspect
has come to the forefront during the COVID-19 pandemic, where AM systems from large, medium,
and small organizations alike have been used to manufacture large quantities of face shields, ventilator
valves, and hands-free door openers [40]. Modularity enables the modular and decentralized control
architecture for machines and tools through embedded computer systems, leading to the development
of smart products [101].
3.4. Virtualization
This design principle refers to two diﬀerent scenarios. First is the case where one virtual resource
is created from multiple physical resources, and in the second scenario, many virtual resources are
created from one or more physical resources. In the former, the physical assets are simulated through
the development of component and system-based digital twins or CPS [117]. In the latter, the software
is used to divide one physical server into multiple virtual servers that act like unique physical devices.
Digital twins can serve a variety of purposes, e.g., performance optimization, visualizing diﬀerent
scenarios, and real-time control. This provides the beneﬁts of extending equipment life, identifying
system ineﬃciencies, and reducing operational, as well as maintenance, costs [118,119]. CPS also
allows the same opportunities by collating sensor data, analysis, and decision making through the use
of decentralized control circuits [120]. Besides, virtual reality (VR) has also proven to be a useful tool for
workforce training, improving their performance, guiding maintenance, and assembly tasks [121,122].
A combination of VR and AR with mobile devices provides stakeholders (employees and customers)
with more insight into the detailed design of products and allows better process tracking [123–125].
Virtualization enables virtual system building, factory data virtualization, virtual modelling language,
and virtual interfacing with digital twins as well as CPS [101].
3.5. Real-Time Capability
One of the main features of Industry 4.0 is the agility of operations that cannot happen without
real-time data collation and analysis supporting decision making, and even real-time cyber-security
attack detection [126].
It is also related to the system’s ability to respond to internal (machine
malfunctions) and external (customer orders) changes promptly, by quickly collecting and analysing
the available data in real-time [127]. Such a capability allows managers to track the business (through
trends and micro-trends), identify areas of improvements (through continuous data analysis), respond
to failures (through informed decision making), and monitor performance (through data collation).
Having modularity within the system is important, as changes could indicate a decision to focus on
some production units, or could detect an abnormality in some others. In this case, the systems should
be able to recover based on the data, by shutting the aﬀected modular units and continuing operations
with the rest until the problem is ﬁxed [128]. Real-time capability supports the other design principles
and can be considered as an essential design principle when moving towards digital transformation.

--- [PAGE 9] ---
Designs 2020, 4, 17
9 of 39
3.6. Service Orientation
Businesses can meet customer demands better through real-time capability (allowing data
processing through BDA) and interoperability (allowing a free ﬂow of information). As a result,
businesses can tailor their services based on changing customer needs, thus, shifting the focus from
products to customers and from mass production to tailored services. Service orientation allows
manufacturing organizations to sell both their products and services to customers. In addition to
selling products, organizations can sell their services to make more proﬁt through an integrated
product-service model [129]. A prime example is the use of AM systems by AM companies to meet the
demand for personal protective equipment and medical devices to support medical professionals to
ﬁght COVID-19 [40]. Such a model helps organizations to outsource some of their processes and focus
on their main business processes [130]. This strategy will encourage innovation at a rapid rate, as the
focus would be concentrated and not dispersed. As a result, the manufacturing industry will be in
a position to sell its main business process(es) as a service to another industry. CM is a good example
that describes an infrastructure where the Internet is used as a medium for oﬀering and selling services
and cloud computing playing a crucial part in enabling the on-demand provision of services [131].
4. Business Process Management
A business process is a set of related functions (and sub-functions) in a speciﬁc sequence performed
by people or machinery that can deliver value to an internal or external customer. Business processes
are present at all organizational levels and not all of them are visible to external customers. A business
process can be represented by ﬂowcharts showing the ﬂow of activities. Managing business processes
eﬀectively leads to higher productivity and eﬃciency of the business. There are diﬀerent approaches to
deﬁning the types of business processes. For example, Rosing, Von Scheel, and Scheer [132] classiﬁed
business processes into main/core processes (focus on delivering value), management processes (focus
on overseeing main processes), and supporting processes (focus on supporting the main processes),
as shown in Figure 2. On the other hand, Kirchmer [133] showed a slight variation and classiﬁed
them as operational processes (primary business processes that create value), management processes
(focus on ensuring operational processes are conducted correctly), and governance processes (ensure
compliance with legal guidelines).
 
Figure 2. Diﬀerent types of business processes.
The smooth running of business processes is essential for a successful business. In that context,
two business management strategies are quite popular, i.e., business process reengineering (BPR)
and business process management (BPM). BPR was introduced in the early 1990s and aimed to
help organizations fundamentally rethink the workﬂow of their business processes and incorporate
radical changes to increase their eﬃciency and productivity, improve customer service, and reduce
operational costs [134,135]. Despite the number of deﬁnitions in the literature, some shared elements

--- [PAGE 10] ---
Designs 2020, 4, 17
10 of 39
can be identiﬁed, e.g., radical change, dramatic performance improvements, high potential business
beneﬁts, process-based organizations, customer orientation, information technology as an enabler,
rapid pace of change, and high risks [136,137]. This approach provided some beneﬁts, but was
faced with criticism because of its inability to validate its assumptions. For example, it assumes
that the ineﬀectiveness of an organization stems from its business processes, but does not oﬀer any
means of validating that. Furthermore, the focus on always making a radical change and completely
disregarding the existing process can have serious consequences. BPR was implemented with an ulterior
motive in the 1990s, with organizations viewing it as a means of formally downsizing and laying-oﬀ
employees to remain competitive in the market [138]. BPR was not aimed at only radical changes,
but can incorporate incremental improvements as well, depending on the nature of the problem at
hand [139]. The methodology is still being used with good eﬀect; even aiding digital transformation
as IT (information technology) is considered as one of its key enablers. Qu, et al. [140] used BPR to
strategically enhance the adaptability and functional integrity of an enterprise information system,
to meet the demands of smart manufacturing systems.
On the other hand, BPM is a management discipline that provides governance for a process-oriented
organization through business process modelling, execution, and evaluation, with the goal of agility and
operational performance [141]. It involves the use of several methods, policies, metrics, management
practices, and software tools, to monitor and continuously improve an organization’s business processes.
Some of its beneﬁts to an organization are shown in Figure 3. There are six core elements that are
critical to the success of BPM initiatives, and these are strategic alignment, governance, methods,
information technology, people, and culture [142]. Strategic alignment refers to aligning the BPM
with the overall strategy of the organization rather than detached from it. Governance establishes
appropriate and transparent accountability in terms of roles and responsibilities, with a focus on
decision-making and reward processes. Methods denote the set of tools and techniques that support
and enable BPM activities. Six sigma is a popular and useful approach for BPM comprising DMAIC
(deﬁne, measure, analyze, improve, control) and DFSS (Design for Six Sigma) approaches [143]. IT is
a key enabler of BPM, like BPR, and involves the use of software tools to support BPM initiatives.
People represent the group of individuals who continually enhance and apply their process and process
management skills, as well as knowledge to improve business processes. Culture incorporates the
collective values and beliefs of the organization. These elements should be at the heart of every BPM
initiative. BPM does not contain itself in soils of singular business processes, but breaks down barriers
among diﬀerent departments to establish an end-to-end business strategy. It is a powerful approach that
has been providing beneﬁts to organizations and governments by focusing on operational processes
and knowledge representation [24,25]. However, its incorrect implementation can also lead to failures,
with some of them highlighted in Figure 4.
With the rapid shift towards Industry 4.0 for business processes, BPM has been a powerful ally in
supporting its adoption. The emerging IoT poses a signiﬁcant challenge for organizations to control
and manage the ﬂow of information through a large number of devices [144]. To cope with this, a new
direction known as BPM Everywhere (BPME) shows promise as a way of blending traditional process
techniques, with additional capabilities to automate the handling of all the independent devices.
BPME aims to leverage traditional business process modelling techniques, together with process
mining and process analytics, to automate and distribute the activities of discovering, measuring,
and improving the business processes [145]. The rising number of technical contributions using IoT
shows that technologies are evolving, and, from a BPM perspective, value creation from the IoT
application to technological revitalizations is pivotal [146]. There are many examples in the literature of
BPM being informed by Industry 4.0 technologies and is used as an enabler for Industry 4.0 [147–151].
Suﬃce to say, BPM will be a key player in the digital transformation journey of organizations worldwide.

--- [PAGE 11] ---
Designs 2020, 4, 17
11 of 39
 
Figure 3. Beneﬁts oﬀered by business process management.
 
Figure 4. Cause and eﬀect diagram for the failure of business process management (BPM) initiatives.
5. Conceptualization of Integrated Business Process Management Framework
It is evident from the literature that Industry 4.0 technologies require integration throughout
an organization to capitalize on their beneﬁts, and this means strategizing to streamline their impact
on all the business processes. Therefore, the central question of this study is: how can BPM be
used to support digital transformation through Industry 4.0? Considering that BPM can leverage
an organization’s performance and provide a structured method to incorporate changes, this study
adopted a narrative literature review strategy [152], to propose a conceptual integrated business
process management (IBPM) framework rooted in the traditional BPM method to support digital
transformation. The main characteristic of a narrative review format is its broad view of the research
and diversity of sources [153]. The narrative review of the literature can be summarized in a conceptual
framework by highlighting the interaction and focal points [154,155]. An unstructured search for

--- [PAGE 12] ---
Designs 2020, 4, 17
12 of 39
articles in leading databases (e.g., Science Direct, Emerald Insight, Springer Link, Taylor & Francis
Online) was conducted. The framework was built by considering the aspects that are often overlooked
in Industry 4.0 transition, and their impact on the digital transformation of an organization, such as
skills gap analysis, risk management, contingency planning, change management, and cost-beneﬁt
analysis. These factors have been identiﬁed by the author through his work on a European funded
project, Growing into Industry 4.0 (focused on identifying the barriers related to the uptake of Industry
4.0 [18]), while working with several manufacturing companies. Using ‘industry 4.0′, coupled with
the under-investigated factors shown in Table 1 as keywords, the most relevant papers were selected
that highlight their interrelationship. The literature formed the basis for IBPM and the framework
with its associated phases is shown in Figure 5. This work is not focused on developing a systematic
literature review, but presenting a conceptual framework supported by literature that highlights key
areas often overlooked due to the sheer volume of technological changes presented by Industry 4.0.
The proposed IBPM framework can be used by manufacturing organizations as an implementation
method, to support their journey towards digital transformation based on Industry 4.0 technologies.
The diﬀerent phases of the IBPM framework with their associated challenges are discussed in the
subsequent sections.
Table 1. Literature used to support the integrated business process management framework.
Main Topics
References
BPM
[147–151,156–164]
Skills gap
[165–172]
Risk management
[173–179]
Change management
[180–188]
Cost-beneﬁt analysis
[2,22,189–194]
Lean/Six Sigma/Lean Six Sigma
[22–25,143,195–199]
 
Figure 5. Integrated business process management framework.
5.1. Phase 1: Process Identiﬁcation
In the very ﬁrst phase of the IBPM framework, a business problem is posed by the IBPM team,
comprised of senior management members, process owners, process participants, process analysts,
and system engineers from each department of the organization. The reason for having such a diverse

--- [PAGE 13] ---
Designs 2020, 4, 17
13 of 39
team is to ensure that a consistent approach could be employed to identify processes relevant to
the problem being addressed. The majority of the time, BPM failure stems from the inability of the
implementation team to connect the factors from diﬀerent departments that inﬂuence the smooth
running of operations. An appropriate IBPM team would help in delimiting the pertinent factors
and would be able to relate them to each other more eﬀectively. It is crucial to outline the processes
that require improvement or reengineering from the start and develop a quantiﬁable measure for
their success.
One of the core elements of BPM (discussed in Section 4) is strategic alignment,
hence aligning the IBPM initiative with the core strategies of the organization is important to ensure
appropriate support from senior management and less resistance from the workforce. Figure 6 presents
an overview of common organizational strategies, deﬁned in three levels [200], and strategies related
to the employment of Industry 4.0 technologies. At this stage, it is essential to align the IBPM initiative
with the organizational strategies, but also to be mindful of Industry 4.0 focused strategies that can
form the basis (depending on organizational priorities), either in the later stages of the IBPM cycle or
during the second iteration of the IBPM method. In addition to IBPM team formation, the strategic
alignment of the BPM initiative, and approaches of measuring success, it is also crucial to deﬁne
the expectations and requirements of internal (employees) and external (customers) stakeholders.
This phase can be supported by undertaking a SWOT (strength-weakness-opportunity-threat) analysis
that can help in identifying internal strengths and weaknesses of the organization, as well as its external
opportunities and threats [201]. There is also a need to identify functional and non-functional business
requirements [202,203], to ensure that the eﬀorts of the IBPM team are aimed in the right direction.
Proper planning is the key in the ﬁrst phase of the IBPM and should include the development of
organizational charts (diagram showing the organizational structure and the relationships, as well
as roles and reporting hierarchy of the people, involved [204]), stakeholder maps (layout showing
the responsibilities of the people involved, their connection to each other, and who can inﬂuence
the project [205]), context diagram (a tool for conﬁrming the overall scope of the business function
and the system integration requirements for process analysis [206]), and business use case diagrams
(diagrams that can establish the context to conﬁrm the functional scope of each business process within
an organization [207]).
 
Figure 6. Strategic alignment for the BPM method.

--- [PAGE 14] ---
Designs 2020, 4, 17
14 of 39
5.2. Phase 2: Process Discovery
The second phase involves the identiﬁcation of the business process to be improved or reengineered.
It involves characterizing and establishing the boundary and interfaces of the diﬀerent business
processes with each other and understanding their connection. For example, the business process
to be improved/reengineered could be the main process, such as manufacturing, or a supporting
process such as accounting (Section 4). A simple ﬂow chart showing the connections between the main
and supporting processes is shown in Figure 7. It is crucial to develop a visual representation of the
identiﬁed process with a proper and realistic breakdown of sub-processes. At this stage, it would
be tempting to develop a layout that shows what the process should be, but it must be drawn as
‘it-is’ (or ‘as-is’) to ensure that the shortcomings could be captured and appropriate actions could be
taken. There are diﬀerent ways the ﬂow of activities for a speciﬁc business process could be recorded.
It could be done by creating simple ﬂow charts, either manually or by the use of simple software tools
such as LucidChart, Microsoft Visio, and Creately [208]. These software packages work on business
process modelling notation (BPMN), which is a standard method to model the steps of a planned
business process from end to end [209]. A critical aspect of the ‘as-is’ process ﬂow chart is the accuracy
of the information, connections, sequence ﬂows, and decision points. Value stream mapping is also
a useful tool that displays the steps in a speciﬁc business process and shows the ﬂow of both materials
and information as they progress through the process to the end-user [210]. The purpose is to form
an ‘as-is’ process model that provides a common understanding and communication among the
stakeholders. This will help the IBPM team to assess the process ﬂow and its shortcomings, to develop
innovative solutions.
 
Figure 7. Sample ﬂow chart of operations.
5.3. Phase 3: Process Analysis
Understanding a business process is the key to its eﬀective management. The primary aim of this
step is to review and analyze the identiﬁed ‘as-is’ process to be improved. The idea is to deﬁne key
performance indicators (KPIs), metrics, key risk indicators (KRIs), and process performance indicators
(PPIs). These are important to understand the requirements of the process and to recommend eﬀective
modiﬁcations. KPIs and metrics go hand in hand and should reﬂect strategic drivers, and should
be consistent with the vision and goals of the organization. A KPI is a measure of performance and
success [211], whereas a metric is a quantiﬁable number within a KPI that helps track performance
and progress [212]. KPIs should be identiﬁed eﬀectively to ensure that beneﬁcial decisions could be
made. As KPI is a measure of how well something is being done, KRI is an indicator of the possibility
of future adverse impact [213]. Business risks need to be meticulously identiﬁed and when metrics
provide an early warning, regarding an increased risk exposure in a certain area of operations, they
become KRIs. They can provide an overview of the risk proﬁle for a speciﬁc business process [214].

--- [PAGE 15] ---
Designs 2020, 4, 17
15 of 39
KRIs measure the potential risk related to a speciﬁc action that the organization is considering, as well
as the risk inherent in the company’s day-to-day operations [215]. PPIs are deﬁned as quantiﬁable
metrics that allow the evaluation of the eﬃciency and eﬀectiveness of business processes. They can be
measured directly by data that is generated within the process ﬂow and are aimed at the process of
controlling and continuous optimization. They can also be considered as process-related KPIs [216].
All the indicators should satisfy the SMART (speciﬁc-measurable-assignable-realistic-time related)
criteria, and should be related to a speciﬁc outcome that can be supported through a set of metrics.
Every indicator can be considered as a metric, but not every metric is an indicator. Some examples of
KPIs, KRIs, and PPIs for a manufacturing process are shown in Table 2.
Table 2. Examples of key performance indicators (KPIs), key risk indicators (KRIs), and process
performance indicators (PPIs).
Category
Description
Deﬁnition
KPIs [217]
Overall equipment eﬀectiveness
Measures equipment eﬃciency across three areas i.e., availability, performance,
and quality.
Manufacturing cycle eﬃciency
Measures value-added time as a percentage of throughput time.
First pass yield
Percentage of products manufactured correctly and to specs the ﬁrst time
through the process.
Capacity utilization
Measures how much a line, plant, or factory uses its total production capacity.
KRIs [214,218]
Mean time between failure
The average amount of time elapsed between machine failures, measured from
the moment the machine initially fails, until the time that the next failure occurs.
Mean time to repair
The average amount of time required to repair a system to full functionality
following a failure measured from the time that the failure occurs until when
the repair is completed.
Downtime percentage due to
scheduled activities
The total amount of downtime that has been set aside for planned system
maintenance activities (as opposed to unplanned downtime) as a percentage of
total downtime (planned and unplanned) during the measurement period.
Percentage of missed scheduled
maintenance activities
The number of scheduled maintenance activities related to machines that did
not take place on or before their scheduled date as a percentage of all
maintenance activities scheduled to occur over the same period.
PPIs [219–221]
Process eﬀectiveness
Relationship between the actual process results and the expected process
results. It is a combination of time, quality, and cost.
Process eﬃciency
Relationship between the results achieved by a process and the resources
consumed in that process.
Process compliance
Refers to internal (percentage of non-conforming products) and external
(compliance with government regulations) compliance.
Throughput time
Represents the amount of time it takes to run a given process, from raw
material to the ﬁnished product.
Business activities do not run independently, as there are signiﬁcant associations and dependencies
among them.
Process dependency analysis enables one to describe interdependence between
processes, based on information, materials, or execution. Therefore, it is critical to identify and
analyze diﬀerent types of interdependence within a speciﬁc business process. It is to be noted
that like the KPIs, KRIs, and PPIs, interdependencies will diﬀer for diﬀerent business processes.
An understanding of task interdependence will help the IBPM team grasp how diﬀerent business
processes, departments, and team members rely on the performance of one another. Even if they
work independently, there are various consequences (positive or negative) that should be considered
to create the most eﬀective processes. Generally, there are three types of process interdependence
i.e., pooled, sequential, and reciprocal [222]. Pooled interdependence refers to the team members
sharing the loose or unstructured responsibility for reaching the goal while working in independent
teams.
Sequential interdependence happens when one department or team must accomplish
something before another team can do their job and it is the most common type of interdependence in
manufacturing processes with assembly lines. Reciprocal interdependence is bi-directional, where teams
or departments rely on one another, making everyone highly responsible for accomplishing goals
and tasks [223]. Identifying interdependence is a critical factor and should be done consistently.

--- [PAGE 16] ---
Designs 2020, 4, 17
16 of 39
A data-driven approach should be employed, where the interdependence of every single machine
(for a manufacturing process) or function is analyzed, quantiﬁed, and corrective action is taken for
enhanced performance [224].
Process analysis should also involve qualitative and quantitative approaches. In the former,
a useful technique is value-added analysis (VAA) that helps in identifying problems within a process
and distinguish the steps into business value-added (BVA), value-added (VA), or non-value-added
(NVA) activities [225]. For quantitative analysis, process simulations using software packages are
beneﬁcial, as diﬀerent scenarios could be visualized and studied without physical implementation.
This phase will provide the IBPM team an indication whether the business process under analysis is
aligned with organizational goals and objectives or not. Overall, the output of this phase is a structured
collection of indicators, process issues, areas of improvement, and inconsistencies. These aspects
should be prioritized by the IBPM team in terms of their impact, and in terms of the estimated eﬀort
required to address them, as the action points will form the basis for the next phase.
5.4. Phase 4: Process Redesign or Reengineering
The goal of this phase is to identify changes to the process that would help to address the
issues identiﬁed in the previous phase.
This could involve either redesigning (improving) the
existing process or reengineering/designing a new process, to meet the performance objectives of the
organization. Both options require alignment with the organizational strategies to ensure compliance
with Phase 1. Simulation tools are extremely useful at this stage, as they can help in virtually analyzing
diﬀerent workﬂows for improvements and designing new systems to investigate their performance.
There are several packages capable of simulating manufacturing-process-ﬂow based on various
modeling paradigms, including process-centric, systems dynamics, Petri net, Monte Carlo simulations,
and agent-based. These packages include, but are not limited to WITNESS, AnyLogic, FlexSim, Simio,
and Simul8 Professional. They can provide animated and interactive models to replicate the operation
of an existing or proposed production facility. They can help solve common manufacturing challenges,
that include assessing the impact of investment, production planning, optimization, and scheduling,
facility designing, manufacturing capability planning, bottleneck analysis, resource allocation, and last
but not least, plan Industry 4.0 approaches [48–50]. The output of this phase is typically a ‘to-be’
process model, incorporating promising changes for better results. The IBPM team should develop
alternative or new concept designs based on Phase 3 (‘as-is’ process) analysis. The choice of redesign
or reengineered design requires an in-depth analysis of the challenges and opportunities oﬀered by the
two options. Ideas related to new process designs should be developed and discussed, but the IBPM
team should consider the knock-on eﬀect throughout the organization.
The new alternatives should consider the full breadth of the project scope, to ensure that a truly
digital transformation is achieved by the organization. Not all ideas will meet the requirements,
therefore, a prioritized list of design features should be developed, and the best options based on
thorough analysis (either by simulation or mathematical calculations) should be discussed. The process
experts and the R&D team should be involved in this step. It is necessary to brainstorm and facilitate
the design process using FMEA (failure mode and eﬀects analysis) or a cause-and-eﬀect diagram.
Being innovative and creative will help the organization to remain competitive. However, it is also
crucial to use established tools for reducing the number of possible designs. The team can use
a problem-solving, analysis, and forecasting tool called TRIZ (theory of inventive problem-solving),
that focuses on universal principles of creativity to formulate innovative solutions that might have
been generated to solve a diﬀerent problem in a diﬀerent sphere of scientiﬁc investigation [226].
After generating some concepts ideas, an evaluation should take place to identify the optimal design.
This can be done by using the Pugh Matrix. It is an easy-to-use qualitative technique that can help in
ranking the multidimensional options generated to identify the optimal option [227]. The purpose of
the Pugh Matrix is to provide the IBPM team with a holistic view of stakeholder (internal and external)
requirements against diﬀerent alternatives in the form of a matrix, instead of listing the positives and

--- [PAGE 17] ---
Designs 2020, 4, 17
17 of 39
negatives of each option. This helps in qualitatively identifying the optimal option. These approaches
can be used for both redesign and reengineering options.
Considering that there are two options to contend, it is crucial to understand the implications of
both. For the redesign, there is an implied acceptance of the current processes. Therefore, the main
focus of the IBPM team would be to use the results from Phase 3 and incrementally devise solutions
for those issues, taking one issue at a time. These issues could stem from performance indicators,
risks, or interdependence studies. For example, if the process to be redesigned is a manufacturing
process, as shown in Figure 8, comprising sensors, tools, actuators, controllers, and networked
systems [228], then the incremental improvements would involve strategically adding Industry 4.0
enabling technologies, to ensure optimal performance. The addition of BDA will help in predictive
modelling to support decision making that can be utilized for ingesting and integrating copious
amounts of data from the production ﬂoor [229], leading to better production or maintenance planning.
However, these incremental changes should be guided by Industry 4.0 design principles (Section 3),
as they will support the IBPM team in identifying and implementing Industry 4.0 scenarios for
enhanced performance.
 
Figure 8. Manufacturing process in today’s factories.
On the other hand, designing a new manufacturing process (reengineering) to incorporate Industry
4.0 enabling technologies will be a massive undertaking, but the eﬀort will be justiﬁed with the rewards.
This step can also be informed by the interdependence analysis and the VAA done for the redesigned
process, but the focus should be on designing the workﬂow by incorporating Industry 4.0 technologies.
It is highly recommended to include industry experts to aid in the design phase, as incorporating the
full breadth of Industry 4.0 is still a work in progress. Most industrial installations today making use
of IoT concepts typically embed sensors in manufacturing equipment or tag products with RFID tags.
The data coming from these devices undergo comparatively little analysis. This is only the beginning
step. The real value in these systems comes from using an information system to analyze the IoT data,
then using the information to make informed decisions. This is one of the reasons why the reengineered
design should be developed with the help of experts and should incorporate the capabilities of the
associated digital technologies. Using the example of a manufacturing process, the new design will lead
to the development of CPS (Section 2.10) in manufacturing called cyber manufacturing (Section 2.11).
The 5C architecture of the CPS is shown in Figure 9. The move from today’s manufacturing process
(Figure 8) to cyber manufacturing (Figure 9) will entail a strict adherence to Industry 4.0 design
principles (Section 3), to realize the full beneﬁts of digitalization, as shown in Figure 10. There is

--- [PAGE 18] ---
Designs 2020, 4, 17
18 of 39
a need to analyze the newly designed process for KPIs, KRIs, PPIs, and interdependencies, to ensure
that it can still meet the organizational goals. The newly designed process should go back to the
‘Process Analysis’ phase and should form its basis as the ‘as-is’ process to be moved to the next phase
of redesign. This approach will help in the establishment of a singular ‘to-be’ process at the end of
Phase 4, rather than multiple options with diﬀerent considerations (as shown in Figure 5). The IBPM
team should not be overwhelmed by the sheer volume and velocity of Industry 4.0 technologies,
and only focus on incorporating the ones that ﬁt the strategic needs of the organization, or provide
a solution to the business problem posed in Phase 1. Digital transformation initiatives fail for many
reasons, e.g., a business trying to do too much without a proper focus or goal, emphasizing on simply
introducing new technologies without assessing their role within the business, compartmentalizing
digital initiatives from the rest of the business, or a large-scale implementation of digitalization without
a realistic view of return on investment [197,230]. The IBPM team should try to avoid these by proper
planning and continuous communication.
In either case (process redesign or reengineering), the IBPM team should make a decision based
on the long-term vision of the organization and the available resources. There is a need to be mindful
of the alternatives on oﬀer for both options, but the key would be to realistically deﬁne a ‘to-be’ process
from the ‘as-is’ process in-line with the strategic requirements of the organization, to either move
gradually or radically towards digital transformation. The requirements and activities needed for
process redesign and reengineering will be diﬀerent. Therefore, it is crucial not to overlook the VAA
performed in Phase 3. The IBPM team should focus on reviewing each step of the VAA, develop
simulation models for the ‘to-be’ process based on the improvements by getting rid of the NVA
activities, and ﬁnalize an optimal workﬂow for the next phase.
 
Figure 9. Techniques and levels of the 5C (connection, conversion, cyber, cognition, and conﬁguration)
architecture for cyber-physical systems (CPS).

--- [PAGE 19] ---
Designs 2020, 4, 17
19 of 39
 
Figure 10. Beneﬁts of adherence to Industry 4.0 design principles.
5.5. Phase 5: Streamlining Business Processes
As described in Phase 4, the ‘to-be’ process could result in process redesign (improvements) or
a reengineered (new) design, with both options aﬀecting the output from a single business process.
Therefore, it is vital to streamline other business processes, to ensure that they can still work cohesively
without causing disruption. For both options (i.e., redesign and reengineering), there could be changes
in interdependencies between business processes (or departments), as a result of the ‘to-be’ process.
The IBPM team needs to consider these changes and plan accordingly. Since the output of Phase 4 is
a single ‘to-be’ process, regardless of whether it was a redesigned process model or a reengineered
one, it should be streamlined with the associated business processes, to ensure a smooth ﬂow of
operations throughout the organization. Considering the example of manufacturing (Figure 11) as the
process of attention, enhancing the manufacturing capacity will automatically increase sales, as more
products will be made and sold. This will put a strain on the sales department to cope with the increase.
Similarly, the inventory levels will also go up and the requirement for raw material will increase.
The cash ﬂow in and out of the organization will increase drastically. Not all organizations can cope
with a sudden increase like this, and could be adversely aﬀected due to a lack of agility and ﬂexibility
in their business processes. There need to be provisions put in place by the IBPM team to accommodate
these changes of the ‘to-be’ process on the entire organization. The team should focus on analyzing the
‘to-be’ process, examine its outcomes from simulation models, and acquiring feedback from the team
members and other staﬀto ensure that diﬀerent scenarios and their impact is captured. This is where
an open, cross-department, collaborative eﬀort is encouraged to identify, analyze, and minimize the
disruption to associated business processes. The IBPM team can also make use of interdependence
studies among departments, to develop a holistic understanding of the dependent, interdependent,
and independent tasks/activities, to aid the streamlining process.

--- [PAGE 20] ---
Designs 2020, 4, 17
20 of 39
 
Figure 11. Relationship among diﬀerent business processes.
5.6. Phase 6: Risk Management and Contingency Planning
Even though KRIs have been identiﬁed in Phase 3 and then reviewed based on the ‘to-be’ process,
there is a need to incorporate risk management and contingency planning as a precursor to the next
phases. Industry 4.0 builds complex, dynamic, and real-time connections between humans and systems
for enhanced performance. These activities generate large data volumes in real-time, which causes
new requirements of the infrastructure, management, and technologies. This could be viewed as more
reasons to worry and more things that can go wrong than ever before [173–177]. The IBPM team should
incorporate methods of avoiding, mitigating, transferring, and accepting risks. Risk intelligence is
needed to collate information, to identify, assess, and treat risks [178,179,231]. Risks can be identiﬁed
through brainstorming (group activity for the generation of a large number of ideas), premortem
(imagining failure and listing the probable reasons), or counterfactual thinking (evaluating choices that
were not made). A risk analysis can be done through developing a risk register, that includes evaluating
risk probability and its impact. It is common practice for any new project to develop a risk register that
quantiﬁes the risk in terms of probability and impact followed by mitigation plans. The IBPM team
should make use of this approach and record the probability and impact of their activities towards
digital transformation. A sample risk assessment is shown in Figure 12 for Industry 4.0 implementation.
The IBPM team should employ systems thinking approach that allows envisioning broad end-to-end
impacts. For example, a cascading failure starts small, but becomes large with time and spreads across
a system as a chain reaction of interconnected parts. Industry 4.0 is all about interconnectedness,
therefore, the IBPM team must consider such failure modes as well [232]. Risk management includes
steps before a risk occurs, whereas contingency planning focuses on steps to be taken if, or when, a risk
occurs [233]. Both are crucial to maintaining and mitigating risks to the business. One major aspect of
mitigating risks is knowing what to do when a risk occurs. This means that contingency planning can
be considered as a component of risk management. Since the organization is moving in an unfamiliar
direction with Industry 4.0, it is necessary to develop contingency plans for the identiﬁed and common
risks (e.g., natural disaster or data losses) and communicate them to the employees.

--- [PAGE 21] ---
Designs 2020, 4, 17
21 of 39
 
Figure 12. Sample risk assessment.
5.7. Phase 7: Skills Gap Analysis
There are many uncertainties around Industry 4.0, ranging from the lack of a proper deﬁnition
to how it should be implemented, and whether organizations are ready for such a change [234,235].
There have also been initiatives to deal with such uncertainties and one such initiative is called Work
4.0. This is an umbrella term that encompasses and discusses the challenges of changing work due
to Industry 4.0 enabling technologies and the possibility of widespread digitalization [236]. One of
the key challenges highlighted in the framework of Work 4.0 is Industry 4.0 and human-machine
interaction [237].
This raises serious concerns about job losses, the erosion of skills, and work
intensiﬁcation, to meet the technological demands of the business. Considering this challenge, it is
imperative to invest in boosting skills and improving individual prospects for advancement at an early
stage. The target for such a skills upgrade should not only be low-skilled workers or the people directly
responsible for technical work, but the organization as a whole, to ensure that everyone can participate
in value creation. This is why the IBPM team should conduct a skills gap analysis, to analyze the
existing skills of the workforce and the required skills, based on the strategic goals of the organization.
In the beginning, the focus should be on the workforce directly involved with the business process being
investigated, and then should spread out evenly throughout the organization. It is widely reported
that organizations are struggling to ensure that their workforce possesses the skills required to thrive
in the Industry 4.0 landscape [238,239]. It is not a matter of simply attracting the right talent with the
required skills and retaining them, but also developing the skillset of the existing workforce. This needs
a cultural shift where the organization takes initiative to upskill its workforce, rather than expecting
people to develop themselves in their own time. Due to the uncertainty around Industry 4.0 skills,
even senior management ﬁnds it hard to gauge the required skills [240]. This is because technologies
such as BDA, robotics, and IoT are rapidly changing the workplace. Considering manufacturing as
an example, the IBPM team should analyze aspects such as what the activities are, what skills the
existing workforce possess, what tools assist them in their work, what happens in a normal working day,
and compare them to what these would look like in a digital world. Based on this analysis, the IBPM
team should utilize established frameworks to gauge workforce skills and plan workshops for their
development. Worker 4.0 is such a framework that highlights the hybrid competencies (a mixture of
adaptive, technological, and technical skills) that the future workforce should possess [165]. The skills
are highlighted in Figure 13 to show the variety of competencies needed to succeed in the digital
age. In addition to the Worker 4.0 concept, there is also the concept of Operator 4.0, that represents
the ‘operator of the future’, a smart and skilled operator who performs ‘work aided by machines’,
if and as needed [166–172]. This framework is more focused on the technological side of Industry 4.0.
For example, an analytical operator who uses BDA [241], an augmented operator who uses AR [167],
and a smarter operator who uses AI-based technologies [242]. These are also informed by Industry 4.0

--- [PAGE 22] ---
Designs 2020, 4, 17
22 of 39
design principles; therefore, they should be the primary focus of the IBPM team during this phase.
For example, an analytical operator can support system integration, an augmented operator can
support modularity, and a smarter operator can support decentralization. To support the workforce in
developing such hybrid skills and competencies, the IBPM team should plan for workshops built on
theories of motivation, communication, and futures studies related to the anticipation of future change
to make the workforce future literate [243]. Future literacy is important, as it can help the workforce in
identifying their developmental needs to be eﬀective in the digital world. These workshops need to be
planned, managed, and delivered with clear objectives, to ensure a successful outcome for both the
workforce and the organization.
 
Figure 13. Worker of the future’s hybrid competencies.
5.8. Phase 8: Change Management
This is perhaps the most crucial phase, as mismanagement here would be catastrophic to the
business. Change management is a collective term for all approaches to prepare, support, and help
individuals, teams, and organizations in making organizational changes [244]. Moving towards digital
transformation is a major change, and it will naturally create resistance and restlessness throughout the
organization, with people being afraid of losing their jobs, not getting promoted promptly, or refusing
to change their traditional ways of working. The IBPM team will need to manage the move towards
Industry 4.0 very carefully, by focusing on the workforce. People are complicated and this is never
more evident than when dealing with a change [245]. Changes can be unexpected or intentional.
The former would be the case when making changes due to the pandemic of COVID-19 [246], whereas
the latter would be something like implementing Industry 4.0 knowingly and willingly. In case of this
intentional change, the role of the IBPM team is to ensure that they develop a formal approach for
managing change by collating the data and opinions of key stakeholders at an early stage, and stay
proactive in updating that data pool and the relevant stakeholders [180,181]. Change management
needs to include every part of the organization to ensure that there is ample support available during
uncertain times, as this would be crucial in retaining skilled individuals [182,183]. The IBPM team
should present a formal case to highlight the need for change and its subsequent impact in an open
setting and articulate how it ﬁts with the strategic goals of the organization [184]. This could be
extremely challenging, and the team could face severe backlash if their approach is not open and

--- [PAGE 23] ---
Designs 2020, 4, 17
23 of 39
honest [185,186]. This is where the IBPM team needs to be proactive and assess the cultural landscape
beforehand, to understand how change has been managed in the past. This can serve as a baseline for
designing essential change elements and can also help in establishing a contingency plan (discussed in
Phase 6). The IBPM team needs to eﬀectively manage this change through a continual reassessment
of its impact and the organization’s willingness, as well as the ability to adapt to the next wave of
transformation [247–249].
There are diﬀerent well-established models for understanding, planning, implementing,
and communicating change, e.g., Lewin’s change management model, McKinsey 7S model, Kotter’s
change management theory, and ADKAR model. The IBPM team should choose the one that they
understand and are conﬁdent in implementing. For example, Lewin’s change management model can
be used, that comprises three steps of unfreeze, change, and refreeze. ‘Unfreeze’ entails preparing the
organization to accept that change is necessary, which involves breaking down the existing status quo
before building up a new way of operations. ‘Change’ state requires time and eﬀective communication
to ensure that new ways are being implemented, with proper justiﬁcations and the workforce being
aware of how this change meets the organizational objectives. When the changes are taking shape and
people have embraced the new ways of working, the organization is ready to ‘refreeze’ by documenting
and standardizing the new protocols [250,251]. Humans are the major challenge in managing change,
because of their natural tendency to resist it, as it could mean moving away from the norm, or doing
more than what they are used to doing on a normal working day. The IBPM team can manage
this through the Prosci ADKAR model. ADKAR is an acronym for awareness, desire, knowledge,
ability, and reinforcement [252]. According to the model, the process of becoming ready for change
is sequential, starting from the current level of each individual, and none of the ﬁve steps could be
avoided, skipped, or reordered [253]. This can work well, as the ﬁrst three could be gauged by the skills
gap analysis in Phase 7, whereas the last two can be instilled through the workshops in Phase 7 planned
by the IBPM team. This shows a complete synergy of activities within diﬀerent phases, where one
phase complements the other in the framework of integrated business process management.
There is also an underlying issue that should be addressed by the IBPM team. Change management
is often viewed as a project with a deﬁnitive start, middle, and endpoints. However, in the digital
age, with the accelerated developments and technological advancements, there would be no end to
change management, as it would be an on-going eﬀort. The IBPM team can lay the foundation for
this by fostering a mindset that can accept and appreciate the fact that change in this day and age
is characterized by ongoing and overlapping transitions at a rapid rate. Business leaders should
learn to manage continuous states and operate with a dynamic change-readiness approach [254,255].
Through this change management regime, the IBPM team can sow the seeds for adoption management.
There needs to be a change in the internal mindset, to focus on prioritizing a state of continuous
evolution and adjustment on the go [256]. Adoption management is about creating lasting change
through culture, education, and technology that can lead to continuous change [257]. This would be
a challenging task, and therefore, the IBPM team should design a change management strategy with
clear indicators of adoption management, to gradually change the mindset of the workforce, and senior
management to instill the idea that there is no end to change and it needs to be managed continuously
in a dynamic manner and in-line with the organizational goals.
5.9. Phase 9: Cost-Beneﬁt Analysis
One of the main barriers to Industry 4.0 adoption is the inability to realistically estimate the value
it would bring to an organization [22,190–192]. Converting beneﬁts to monetary value is considered
to be extremely challenging, because most managers themselves are unaware of what Industry 4.0
technologies can do, and in what areas it can beneﬁt their organization [193,258]. There are several
tools available that can guide one through the diﬀerent steps to calculate return on investment (ROI),
payback period (PP), and beneﬁts to cost ratio (BCR). It is highly dependent on how in-depth analysis
the organization intends to perform, keeping in mind that the more thorough the analysis is, the more

--- [PAGE 24] ---
Designs 2020, 4, 17
24 of 39
resources would need to be deployed to collate data. In this phase, the IBPM team needs to consider
every single beneﬁt that can result by employing Industry 4.0 enabling technologies, convert the
beneﬁts into monetary value, and judge against the associated costs. Typically, envisioning beneﬁts is
the most diﬃcult aspect of such estimations, as people ﬁnd it easier to estimate costs [259]. The IBPM
team should consider taking advantage of the external Industry 4.0 experts hired in Phase 4, to ensure
that they can identify appropriate beneﬁts and then use process owners to quantify those beneﬁts and
discuss the costs of implementation.
ROI requires a comprehensive evaluation of the collected data, therefore, the IBPM team should
consider using an established and well-structured framework for their analysis. One such approach is
called Phillips ROI Methodology™, comprising 10 steps divided into four phases [260]. The ﬁrst phase
is evaluation planning, consisting of two steps, i.e., developing project objectives and evaluation plans.
The second phase is called data collection and comprises two steps, i.e., collecting data before/during
and after project implementation. The third phase is data analysis and is the most challenging one
with ﬁve steps, i.e., isolating project eﬀects, capturing project costs, converting data to monetary
value, calculations for ROI, PP, or BCR, and ﬁnally, identifying intangible beneﬁts. The last phase is
the reporting phase that deals with developing and disseminating the results of the implementation
to stakeholders (internal and external). This is quite a comprehensive approach and takes sound
planning, data collation activities, and analysis methodologies. The IBPM team needs to conduct
several interviews, surveys, record the opinions of the workforce on diﬀerent matters, and most
importantly, put resources in place to collate data [261]. It is to be noted that certain criteria in
quantifying the beneﬁts are subjective to the situation and nature of the business, hence, the people
involved in the calculation process must acknowledge the complexity and situational variables to
arrive at an optimal result [262]. The IBPM team should also ensure that there are no exaggerations in
beneﬁts calculations or associated costs [263].
The IBPM team needs to consider every single aspect of a speciﬁc Industry 4.0 technology
separately ﬁrst, and then in combination with others, to develop a holistic understanding of the beneﬁts.
Phillips ROI Methodology™is an example to show that a structured method should be followed,
to ensure that a realistic cost-beneﬁt estimation can be achieved. There are several methods available in
the literature that take into consideration other factors, such as phased investments with over one-year
PP [264], and calculating net present value or internal rate of return [265]. However, converting
data to monetary value is common to all methods, regardless of the ﬁnal inference. If we consider
an example of a manufacturing process where diﬀerent parts require manual assembly by operators
and plan to employ augmented reality to expedite their performance, then a cost-beneﬁt analysis
can be undertaken. Firstly, there is extensive literature on increased worker performance using AR
protocols [52–58] that the IBPM team should consider. Secondly, this example also works well with the
‘augmented operator’ in the Operator 4.0 framework discussed in Phase 7, that shows compliance with
established Industry 4.0 protocols, that should make the identiﬁcation and subsequent analysis easier.
The approach should be to analyze what is being changed, what eﬀect it will have, and what will be its
signiﬁcance. The diﬃculty would not only be in identifying beneﬁts, but realistically quantifying them
as well. Table 3 shows an example breakdown of some beneﬁts and costs associated with employing
AR, to develop the concept of an augmented operator on the shop ﬂoor. The IBPM team should
conduct similar extensive cost-beneﬁt analysis in this phase, based on the ‘to-be’ process developed in
Phase 4 through simulation models. This will form the basis for the next phase, where the simulations
will be validated through pilot runs before moving to full-scale implementation.

--- [PAGE 25] ---
Designs 2020, 4, 17
25 of 39
Table 3. Identiﬁcation of project costs.
#
Beneﬁts
Monetary Value
1
Improvements in proﬁt due to the reduction of assembly time
X1
2
Error reductions
X2
3
Time savings
X3
4
Increased performance
X4
5
Faster learning for existing and new workers
X5
6
More products assembled during a normal working shift
X6
7
Intangible beneﬁts (higher employee satisfaction/engagement,
reduction of stress in employees, teamwork, job satisfaction)
—
Total
XX
Costs
Monetary Value
1
Special software and hardware
Y1
2
Storage capacity for data and hardware in speciﬁc digital and
physical spaces, respectively
Y2
3
Training of individuals
Y3
Total
YY
Calculations
Results
ROI = XX−YY
YY
∗100
ZZ%
PP = YY
XX ∗12
ZZ months
BCR = YY
XX
ZZ:1
5.10. Phase 10: Process Validation and Implementation
This phase focuses on validating the simulation models developed in Phase 4 to an acceptable level
of diﬀerence. Depending upon the level of detail and the complexities of the ‘to-be’ process, several
scaled pilot runs could be conducted, to ensure the seamless integration of all the deﬁned strategies
from Phase 1. The IBPM team should plan and conduct a pilot run, as it can help in minimising failure
risks, providing more eﬀective control, conﬁrming or disproving established interdependencies in
Phase 3, identifying additional improvements in either the solution or implementation launch itself,
and improving future projections of beneﬁts of full-scale implementation [266,267]. The team should
ensure that the pilot is reversible and does not signiﬁcantly disrupt the normal business processes.
It should involve proper planning, clear goals, assign responsibilities, budgeting, data collation
methods, and measurement protocols for comparisons with the required targets. Communication is
the key to ensure that everyone is on-board and plays their role appropriately. The pilot ‘to-be’ system
should be exposed to a variety of inputs and process conditions. The IBPM team should systematically
analyze the diﬀerences between the predicted performance and the actual performance after the pilot
run, to identify improvement opportunities [268].
After validating the simulation models through pilot runs, the results should be communicated to
stakeholders and their feedback should be recorded [269]. This should form the basis for a full-scale
implementation plan. The plan should be adjusted based on the results, analyses, and opportunities
from the pilot run and for the diﬀerence in the scale of the rollout. The IBPM team should identify
factors favoring/opposing the full-scale implementation, and recognize implications, as well as risks,
from failing to address the obstacles. There is also a need to conduct another cost-beneﬁt analysis,
to ensure that a full-scale implementation is a viable option for the organization. It could be the case
that the organization is happy to continue running a scaled model parallel to their existing business
processes and intends to integrate the ‘to-be’ process gradually, over a longer period than previously

--- [PAGE 26] ---
Designs 2020, 4, 17
26 of 39
planned. This could be due to a lack of resources, a huge skills gap, resistance from the workforce,
or lack of ﬂexibility and agility in the existing business processes.
The successful validation of the ‘to-be’ business process model should lead to full-scale
implementation. If the organization is happy with the results, then the IBPM team should plan
a full-scale pilot, by following the same protocols used in the scaled pilot run. The full-scale pilot
of the ‘to-be’ process would be a permanent deployment that delivers fully on the organizational
goals. Change management will be a key factor here, and that is why it was addressed in Phase 8,
with a focus on adoption management. The IBPM team should look to include more senior management
staﬀat this point, and some members from the original IBPM team should be trained to become
‘digital champions’, to continue the transformation by creating a sense of ownership among the
workforce [22,270]. After the successful implementation of the ‘to-be’ business process, data should
be collated, and the matrices should be compared with Phase 1, to ensure that the project yielded
the required results for the organization. The operating procedures should be documented and
standardized. A future management plan should be developed by the IBPM team, to continuously
monitor the new process, address the training needs of the workforce, and identify opportunities for
improvements [271].
5.11. Phase 11: Process Monitoring and Controlling
Once the ‘to-be’ business process is running, relevant data should be collated by the IBPM team to
perform a post-implementation review of the new process for continuous improvements. The data
should be analyzed to determine the eﬃcacy of the new process concerning its performance measures
and objectives. Common issues in manufacturing systems such as bottlenecks, recurrent errors,
or deviations should be identiﬁed, and corrective actions should be undertaken. The ﬁndings of the
monitoring and evaluation should be shared within the organization to serve as feedback into the
iterative IBPM improvement lifecycle. As time goes by, new issues may arise in the same or in other
business processes that would require the IBPM cycle to be repeated again. The IBPM team should
focus on three aspects in this phase i.e., the performance of the processes, process management, and of
the organization as a whole. Process monitoring and controlling is an on-going activity and should
be employed to aid in continuous improvement of business processes. There are several approaches
capable of providing the intended beneﬁts. Lean six sigma approaches would be a good ﬁt. In this
case, DMAIC (deﬁne, measure, analyze, improve, control) would work well and is a well-established
and commonly used BPM tool [272–274].
6. Conclusions
The adoption of Industry 4.0 is no longer a choice. It has become a necessity for businesses to
succeed in the market. This has created serious doubts and concerns over the right time and approach
for digital transformation. The lack of standardized implementation protocols is a major limiting
factor. This paper has presented a conceptual framework termed as integrated business process
management, that can help manufacturing organizations transition from traditional manufacturing
to Industry 4.0.
The framework has incorporated under-investigated factors to ensure that the
organizations are minimizing their risk of failure. The use of the business process management
method gives manufacturers a sense of familiarity, as they have been employing these principles
for decades.
Major reasons for the rejection of Industry 4.0 implementation methodologies by
manufactures are fear of the unknown and resistance to change, whereas the use of business process
management can mitigate them. The framework has presented a structured approach with clearly
deﬁned phases and associated challenges to ensure that it can reduce the uncertainty around Industry
4.0 implementation. The pandemic of COVID-19 has expedited the planning phase, with organizations
moving swiftly towards Industry 4.0 implementation. In this context, the integrated business process
management framework can prove beneﬁcial and can serve as a good template to drive business-speciﬁc
objectives forward.

--- [PAGE 27] ---
Designs 2020, 4, 17
27 of 39
The proposed IBPM framework diﬀers from the traditional BPM method in a couple of ways.
Firstly, it incorporates factors that are often overlooked in Industry 4.0 implementation, e.g., skills
gap analysis, risk management, contingency planning, change management, and cost-beneﬁt analysis.
It shows their signiﬁcance and how they should be incorporated to ensure that a smooth transition is
achieved. Secondly, it does not show over-reliance on technological tools for the implementation, but
provides a more human-centric approach to analyze issues and develop rational solutions. BPM is
an established method, and has been used for decades by manufactures to ensure that their business
processes are eﬃcient and eﬀective. It is one of the most comprehensive and encompassing concepts
available for businesses to generate a competitive advantage through cost reduction, process excellence,
and continuous process improvement. That is why it was chosen as the basis of the IBPM approach to
support digital transformation in the manufacturing sector. The IBPM framework provides eﬀective
governance (static and dynamic) to direct the digital transformation by considering the core elements
of BPM, i.e., strategic alignment, governance, methods, information technology, people, and culture.
It further involves intricate features (e.g., ﬁscal, risk/change management, hybrid competencies) that
can help in developing an agile culture throughout the organization based on digital technologies.
Digitalization, IoT, and big data analytics are just a few of the disruptions that require radically
rethinking the way business processes operate. The pace of change is increasing with business
processes continuously evolving to meet customer requirements. Under these circumstances, it is
critical for BPM to evolve as well, to accommodate such changes. IBPM should be considered as
an evolved version of BPM, as a response to the rapid technological changes that have signiﬁcantly
transformed the manufacturing sector. The phases of IBPM have been discussed in Section 5 and
they show complete synergy of activities, where one phase complements the other to support digital
transformation in the manufacturing sector. The associated challenges that manufacturing organizations
may face while transitioning into Industry 4.0-enabled digital enterprises have also been highlighted,
and appropriate solutions based on literature have been presented to mitigate them.
It is to be noted that there are no standardized protocols for Industry 4.0 implementation, and any
implementation strategy, such as IBPM proposed in this work, should be adapted based on the
nature of the business, its complexities, and interdependencies to ensure a favorable outcome. On the
other hand, ineﬀective management of such a framework could lead to signiﬁcant losses in revenue,
customers, and intellectual property. Solutions to diﬀerent challenges have been presented in this work,
that should be used to manage the digital transformation eﬀectively and to develop business-speciﬁc
solutions. The integrated business process management framework presented in this paper can support
the manufacturing organizations in their pursuit of digital transformation. It is deeply rooted in BPM
that can minimize resistance towards its adoption and can give the conﬁdence to expedite the move
towards Industry 4.0. The next stage of the work would be the implementation of the IBPM framework
in a manufacturing organization for digital transformation.
Funding: This research did not receive any external funding.
Conﬂicts of Interest: There is only one author; hence, there is no conﬂict of interest.
References
1.
Khan, S. Leadership in the Digital Age: A Study on the Eﬀects of Digitalisation on Top Management
Leadership. Master’s Thesis, Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden, 2016.
2.
Ghobakhloo, M. The future of manufacturing industry: A strategic roadmap toward Industry 4.0. J. Manuf.
Technol. Manag. 2018, 29, 910–936. [CrossRef]
3.
Hermann, M.; Pentek, T.; Otto, B. Design principles for industrie 4.0 scenarios. In Proceedings of the 2016
49th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS), Koloa, HI, USA, 5–8 January 2016; IEEE:
Koloa, HI, USA, 2016; pp. 3928–3937.
4.
Sarı, T.; Güle¸s, H.K.; Yi˘gitol, B. Awareness and readiness of Industry 4.0: The case of Turkish manufacturing
industry. Adv. Prod. Eng. Manag. 2020, 15, 57–68.

--- [PAGE 28] ---
Designs 2020, 4, 17
28 of 39
5.
Butt, J. Exploring the interrelationship between additive manufacturing and Industry 4.0. Designs 2020, 4, 13.
[CrossRef]
6.
Basl, J. Pilot study of readiness of Czech companies to implement the principles of Industry 4.0. Manag. Prod.
Eng. Rev. 2017, 8, 3–8. [CrossRef]
7.
Machado, C.G.; Winroth, M.; Carlsson, D.; Almström, P.; Centerholt, V.; Hallin, M. Industry 4.0 readiness in
manufacturing companies: Challenges and enablers towards increased digitalization. Procedia CIRP 2019,
81, 1113–1118. [CrossRef]
8.
Available online: https://slcontrols.com/beneﬁts-of-industry-4-0/ (accessed on 20 May 2020).
9.
Ardolino, M.; Rapaccini, M.; Saccani, N.; Gaiardelli, P.; Crespi, G.; Ruggeri, C. The role of digital technologies
for the service transformation of industrial companies. Int. J. Prod. Res. 2018, 56, 2116–2132. [CrossRef]
10.
Moeuf, A.; Pellerin, R.; Lamouri, S.; Tamayo-Giraldo, S.; Barbaray, R. The industrial management of SMEs in
the era of Industry 4.0. Int. J. Prod. Res. 2018, 56, 1118–1136. [CrossRef]
11.
Heavin, C.; Power, D.J. Challenges for digital transformation–towards a conceptual decision support guide
for managers. J. Decis. Syst. 2018, 27 (Suppl. 1), 38–45. [CrossRef]
12.
McKinsey & Co. Digital Manufacturing: The Revolution will be Virtualized. 2015. Available online:
https://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/operations/our-insights/digital-manufacturing-the-
revolution-will-be-virtualized (accessed on 18 June 2020).
13.
Ardito, L.; Petruzzelli, A.M.; Panniello, U.; Garavelli, A.C. Towards Industry 4.0: Mapping digital technologies
for supply chain management-marketing integration. Bus. Process Manag. J. 2019, 25, 323–346. [CrossRef]
14.
Frank, A.G.; Mendes, G.H.; Ayala, N.F.; Ghezzi, A. Servitization and Industry 4.0 convergence in the digital
transformation of product ﬁrms: A business model innovation perspective. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Chang.
2019, 141, 341–351. [CrossRef]
15.
Available online: https://ec.europa.eu/growth/tools-databases/dem/monitor/tags/industry-40 (accessed on
20 May 2020).
16.
Available online: https://innovateuk.blog.gov.uk/2017/03/28/what-does-the-fourth-industrial-revolution-4ir-
mean-for-uk-business/ (accessed on 20 May 2020).
17.
Urciuoli, L.; Hintsa, J.; Ahokas, J. Drivers and barriers aﬀecting usage of e-Customs—A global survey with
customs administrations using multivariate analysis techniques. Gov. Inf. Q. 2013, 30, 473–485. [CrossRef]
18.
Available
online:
https://northsearegion.eu/growin4/about-the-growin-40-project/
(accessed
on
20 May 2020).
19.
Müller, J.M.; Däschle, S. Business model innovation of industry 4.0 solution providers towards customer
process innovation. Processes 2018, 6, 260. [CrossRef]
20.
Zhu, Q.; Geng, Y. Drivers and barriers of extended supply chain practices for energy saving and emission
reduction among Chinese manufacturers. J. Clean. Prod. 2013, 40, 6–12. [CrossRef]
21.
Available
online:
https://www.industry.gov.au/funding-and-incentives/industry-40
(accessed
on
20 May 2020).
22.
Butt, J. A Strategic Roadmap for the Manufacturing Industry to Implement Industry 4.0. Design 2020, 4, 11.
[CrossRef]
23.
Sony, M. Industry 4.0 and lean management: A proposed integration model and research propositions.
Prod. Manuf. Res. 2018, 6, 416–432. [CrossRef]
24.
Apostolou, D.; Mentzas, G.; Stojanovic, L.; Thoenssen, B.; Lobo, T.P. A collaborative decision framework for
managing changes in e-Government services. Gov. Inf. Quart. 2011, 28, 101–116. [CrossRef]
25.
Zhang, C.; Liu, H.; Zheng, J. The model of BPM based on six sigma and its application on material delivery
of discrete manufacturing enterprise. In Proceedings of the 2011 International Conference of Information
Technology, Computer Engineering and Management Sciences, Nanjing, China, 24–25 September 2011;
Volume 4, pp. 122–125.
26.
Pessl, E.; Sorko, S.R.; Mayer, B. Roadmap Industry 4.0–implementation guideline for enterprises. Int. J. Sci.
Technol. Soc. 2017, 5, 193–202. [CrossRef]
27.
Colli, M.; Madsen, O.; Berger, U.; Møller, C.; Wæhrens, B.V.; Bockholt, M. Contextualizing the outcome of
a maturity assessment for Industry 4.0. IFAC-Pap. 2018, 51, 1347–1352. [CrossRef]
28.
Butt, J.; Shirvani, H. Additive, subtractive, and hybrid manufacturing processes. In Advances in Manufacturing
and Processing of Materials and Structures; CRC Press: Boca Raton, FL, USA, 2018; pp. 187–218.

--- [PAGE 29] ---
Designs 2020, 4, 17
29 of 39
29.
Butt, J.; Shirvani, H. Experimental analysis of metal/plastic composites made by a new hybrid method.
Addit. Manuf. 2018, 22, 216–222. [CrossRef]
30.
Butt, J.; Onimowo, D.A.; Gohrabian, M.; Sharma, T.; Shirvani, H. A desktop 3D printer with dual extruders
to produce customised electronic circuitry. Front. Mech. Eng. 2018, 13, 528–534. [CrossRef]
31.
Butt, J.; Hewavidana, Y.; Mohaghegh, V.; Sadeghi-Esfahlani, S.; Shirvani, H. Hybrid Manufacturing and
Experimental Testing of Glass Fiber Enhanced Thermoplastic Composites. J. Manuf. Mater. Process. 2019,
3, 96. [CrossRef]
32.
Butt, J.; Bhaskar, R. Investigating the Eﬀects of Annealing on the Mechanical Properties of FFF-Printed
Thermoplastics. J. Manuf. Mater. Process. 2020, 4, 38. [CrossRef]
33.
Butt, J.; Ghorabian, M.; Mohaghegh, V.; Shirvani, H. Finite Element Modeling and Mechanical Testing of
Metal Composites Made by Composite Metal Foil Manufacturing. J. Manuf. Mater. Process. 2019, 3, 81.
[CrossRef]
34.
Leal, R.; Barreiros, F.M.; Alves, L.; Romeiro, F.; Vasco, J.C.; Santos, M.; Marto, C. Additive manufacturing
tooling for the automotive industry. Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol. 2017, 92, 1671–1676. [CrossRef]
35.
Yakout, M.; Cadamuro, A.; Elbestawi, M.A.; Veldhuis, S.C. The selection of process parameters in additive
manufacturing for aerospace alloys. Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol. 2017, 92, 2081–2098. [CrossRef]
36.
Youssef, A.; Hollister, S.J.; Dalton, P.D. Additive manufacturing of polymer melts for implantable medical
devices and scaﬀolds. Biofabricatio 2017, 9, 012002. [CrossRef]
37.
Strano, G.; Hao, L.; Everson, R.M.; Evans, K.E. A new approach to the design and optimisation of support
structures in additive manufacturing. Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol. 2013, 66, 1247–1254. [CrossRef]
38.
Langelaar, M. Topology optimization of 3D self-supporting structures for additive manufacturing.
Addit. Manuf. 2016, 12, 60–70. [CrossRef]
39.
Butt, J.; Ghorabian, M.; Ahmed, A.; Shirvani, H. Finite element modelling and validation of thermomechanical
behaviour for layered aluminium parts made by composite metal foil manufacturing. J. Compos. Sci. 2018,
2, 68. [CrossRef]
40.
Available online: https://3dprintingindustry.com/news/3d-printing-community-responds-to-covid-19-and-
coronavirus-resources-169143/ (accessed on 21 April 2020).
41.
Kok, Y.; Tan, X.P.; Wang, P.; Nai, M.L.S.; Loh, N.H.; Liu, E.; Tor, S.B. Anisotropy and heterogeneity of
microstructure and mechanical properties in metal additive manufacturing: A critical review. Mater. Des.
2018, 139, 565–586. [CrossRef]
42.
Tamura, H. Steady steps and giant leap toward practical mixed reality systems and applications.
In Proceedings of the International Status Conference on Virtual and Augmented Reality, Leipzig, Germany,
5 November 2002; pp. 3–12.
43.
Jung, T.; tom Dieck, M.C. Augmented Reality and Virtual Reality; Empowering Human, Place and Business;
Springer International Publishing: Cham, Switzerland, 2018.
44.
Tepper, O.M.; Rudy, H.L.; Lefkowitz, A.; Weimer, K.A.; Marks, S.M.; Stern, C.S.; Garfein, E.S. Mixed reality
with HoloLens: Where virtual reality meets augmented reality in the operating room. Plast. Reconstr. Surg.
2017, 140, 1066–1070. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
45.
Bonetti, F.; Warnaby, G.; Quinn, L. Augmented reality and virtual reality in physical and online
retailing: A review, synthesis and research agenda. In Augmented Reality and Virtual Reality; Springer:
Cham, Switzerland, 2018; pp. 119–132.
46.
Chavan, S.R. Augmented reality vs. virtual reality: Diﬀerences and similarities. Int. J. Adv. Res. Comput.
Eng. Technol. 2016, 5, 212611467.
47.
Gracia, L.; Perez-Vidal, C.; Mronga, D.; de Paco, J.M.; Azorin, J.M.; de Gea, J. Robotic manipulation for the
shoe-packaging process. Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol. 2017, 92, 1053–1067. [CrossRef]
48.
Chi, H.L.; Kang, S.C.; Wang, X. Research trends and opportunities of augmented reality applications in
architecture, engineering, and construction. Autom. Constr. 2013, 33, 116–122. [CrossRef]
49.
Gervautz, M.; Schmalstieg, D. Anywhere interfaces using handheld augmented reality. Computer 2012,
45, 26–31. [CrossRef]
50.
Zhou, F.; Duh, H.B.L.; Billinghurst, M. Trends in augmented reality tracking, interaction and display:
A review of ten years of ISMAR. In Proceedings of the 2008 7th IEEE/ACM International Symposium on
Mixed and Augmented Reality, Cambridge, UK, 15–18 September 2008; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2008;
pp. 193–202.

--- [PAGE 30] ---
Designs 2020, 4, 17
30 of 39
51.
Piumsomboon, T.; Altimira, D.; Kim, H.; Clark, A.; Lee, G.; Billinghurst, M. September. Grasp-Shell vs.
gesture-speech: A comparison of direct and indirect natural interaction techniques in augmented reality.
In Proceedings of the 2014 IEEE International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality (ISMAR),
Munich, Germany, 10–12 September 2014; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2014; pp. 73–82.
52.
Nee, A.Y.; Ong, S.K.; Chryssolouris, G.; Mourtzis, D. Augmented reality applications in design and
manufacturing. CIRP Ann. 2012, 61, 657–679. [CrossRef]
53.
Akçayır, M.; Akçayır, G. Advantages and challenges associated with augmented reality for education:
A systematic review of the literature. Educ. Res. Rev. 2017, 20, 1–11. [CrossRef]
54.
Wake, N.; Bjurlin, M.A.; Rostami, P.; Chandarana, H.; Huang, W.C. Three dimensional printing and
augmented reality: Enhanced precision for robotic assisted partial nephrectomy. Urology 2018, 116, 227–228.
[CrossRef]
55.
Lima, J.P.; Roberto, R.; Simões, F.; Almeida, M.; Figueiredo, L.; Teixeira, J.M.; Teichrieb, V. Markerless tracking
system for augmented reality in the automotive industry. Expert Syst. Appl. 2017, 82, 100–114. [CrossRef]
56.
Poushneh, A.; Vasquez-Parraga, A.Z. Discernible impact of augmented reality on retail customer’s experience,
satisfaction and willingness to buy. J. Retail. Consum. Serv. 2017, 34, 229–234. [CrossRef]
57.
Chen, Y.P.; Ko, J.C. CryptoAR Wallet:
A Blockchain Cryptocurrency Wallet Application that Uses
Augmented Reality for On-chain User Data Display. In Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on
Human-Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services, Taipei, Taiwan, 1–4 October 2019; pp. 1–5.
58.
Yung, R.; Khoo-Lattimore, C. New realities: A systematic literature review on virtual reality and augmented
reality in tourism research. Curr. Issues Tour. 2019, 22, 2056–2081. [CrossRef]
59.
Wörner, M.; Ertl, T.; Miksch, S.; Santucci, G. Visual analysis of advanced manufacturing simulations.
In Proceedings of the EuroVa 2011: International Workshop on Visual Analytics, Bergen, Norway, 31 May 2011;
pp. 29–32.
60.
Acheson, C.; Mackle, D.; Murphy, A.; Butterﬁeld, J.; Higgins, P.; Collins, R.; Tame, R. Using design of
experiments to deﬁne factory simulations for manufacturing investment decisions. In Proceedings of the
34th International Manufacturing Conference, Sligo, Ireland, 30–31 August 2017.
61.
Ruediger, P.; Hagen, H. Dealing with uncertainties in manufacturing process simulations. In Applied Mechanics
and Materials; Trans Tech Publications Ltd.: Stafa-Zurich, Switzerland, 2017; Volume 869, pp. 226–233.
62.
Esmaeilian, B.; Behdad, S.; Wang, B. The evolution and future of manufacturing: A review. J. Manuf. Syst.
2016, 39, 79–100. [CrossRef]
63.
Demystifying Collaborative Industrial Robots. Available online: https://ifr.org/downloads/papers/IFR_
Demystifying_Collaborative_Robots.pdf (accessed on 3 April 2020).
64.
Djuric, A.M.; Urbanic, R.J.; Rickli, J.L. A framework for collaborative robot (CoBot) integration in advanced
manufacturing systems. SAE Int. J. Mater. Manuf. 2016, 9, 457–464. [CrossRef]
65.
El Zaatari, S.; Marei, M.; Li, W.; Usman, Z. Cobot programming for collaborative industrial tasks: An overview.
Robot. Auton. Syst. 2019, 116, 162–180. [CrossRef]
66.
Michaelis, J.E.; Siebert-Evenstone, A.; Shaﬀer, D.W.; Mutlu, B. Collaborative or Simply Uncaged?
Understanding Human-Cobot Interactions in Automation. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems, Honolulu, HI, USA, 21 April 2020; pp. 1–12.
67.
Tucker, K.; Bulim, J.; Koch, G.; North, M.M. Internet industry: A perspective review through internet of
things and internet of everything. Int. Manag. Rev. 2018, 14, 26.
68.
Aazam, M.; Zeadally, S.; Harras, K.A. Deploying fog computing in industrial internet of things and industry
4.0. IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform. 2018, 14, 4674–4682. [CrossRef]
69.
Wan, J.; Tang, S.; Shu, Z.; Li, D.; Wang, S.; Imran, M.; Vasilakos, A.V. Software-deﬁned industrial internet of
things in the context of industry 4.0. IEEE Sens. J. 2016, 16, 7373–7380. [CrossRef]
70.
Hylving, L.; Schultze, U. Evolving the modular layered architecture in digital innovation: The case of the
car’s instrument cluster. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Information Systems (ICIS 2013),
Milan, Italy, 15–18 December 2013; p. 13.
71.
Kiel, D.; Müller, J.M.; Arnold, C.; Voigt, K.I. Sustainable industrial value creation: Beneﬁts and challenges of
industry 4.0. Int. J. Innov. Manag. 2017, 21, 1740015. [CrossRef]
72.
Cheng, J.; Chen, W.; Tao, F.; Lin, C.L. Industrial IoT in 5G environment towards smart manufacturing. J. Ind.
Inf. Integr. 2018, 10, 10–19. [CrossRef]

--- [PAGE 31] ---
Designs 2020, 4, 17
31 of 39
73.
Lee, J.; Kao, H.A.; Yang, S. Service innovation and smart analytics for industry 4.0 and big data environment.
Procedia Cirp 2014, 16, 3–8. [CrossRef]
74.
Raghupathi, W.; Raghupathi, V. Big data analytics in healthcare: Promise and potential. Health Inf. Sci. Syst.
2014, 2, 3. [CrossRef]
75.
Babiceanu, R.F.; Seker, R. Big Data and virtualization for manufacturing cyber-physical systems: A survey of
the current status and future outlook. Comput. Ind. 2016, 81, 128–137. [CrossRef]
76.
Mell, P.G.; Grance, T. The NIST Deﬁnition of Cloud Computing; NIST Special Publication: Gaithersburg, MD,
USA, 2011.
77.
Varghese, B.; Buyya, R. Next generation cloud computing: New trends and research directions. Future Gener.
Comput. Syst. 2018, 79, 849–861. [CrossRef]
78.
Singh, A.; Chatterjee, K. Cloud security issues and challenges: A survey. J. Netw. Comput. Appl. 2017,
79, 88–115. [CrossRef]
79.
He, W.; Xu, L. A state-of-the-art survey of cloud manufacturing. Int. J. Comput. Integr. Manuf. 2015,
28, 239–250. [CrossRef]
80.
Ooi, K.B.; Lee, V.H.; Tan, G.W.H.; Hew, T.S.; Hew, J.J. Cloud computing in manufacturing: The next industrial
revolution in Malaysia? Expert Syst. Appl. 2018, 93, 376–394. [CrossRef]
81.
Available
online:
https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/28/technology/facebook-hack-data-breach.html
(accessed on 24 May 2020).
82.
Available online: https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2020/jan/04/cambridge-analytica-data-leak-global-
election-manipulation (accessed on 24 May 2020).
83.
Available online: https://www.iso.org/isoiec-27001-information-security.html (accessed on 24 May 2020).
84.
Shaﬁq, S.I.; Sanin, C.; Szczerbicki, E.; Toro, C. Virtual engineering object/virtual engineering process:
A specialized form of cyber physical system for Industrie 4.0. Procedia Comput. Sci. 2015, 60, 1146–1155.
[CrossRef]
85.
Available online: https://www.i-scoop.eu/industry-4-0/ (accessed on 24 May 2020).
86.
Gunal, M.M. (Ed.) Simulation for Industry 4.0: Past, Present, and Future; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2019.
87.
Gunes, V.; Peter, S.; Givargis, T.; Vahid, F. A survey on concepts, applications, and challenges in cyber-physical
systems. KSII Trans. Internet Inf. Syst. 2014, 8, 4242–4268.
88.
Lee, J.; Bagheri, B.; Kao, H.A. A cyber-physical systems architecture for industry 4.0-based manufacturing
systems. Manuf. Lett. 2015, 3, 18–23. [CrossRef]
89.
Jiang, J.R. An improved cyber-physical systems architecture for Industry 4.0 smart factories. Adv. Mech. Eng.
2018, 10, 1687814018784192. [CrossRef]
90.
Lee, J.; Jin, C.; Bagheri, B. Cyber physical systems for predictive production systems. Prod. Eng. 2017,
11, 155–165. [CrossRef]
91.
Humayed, A.; Lin, J.; Li, F.; Luo, B. Cyber-physical systems security—A survey. IEEE Internet Things J. 2017,
4, 1802–1831. [CrossRef]
92.
Alcácer, V.; Cruz-Machado, V. Scanning the industry 4.0: A literature review on technologies for manufacturing
systems. Eng. Sci. Technol. Int. J. 2019, 22, 899–919. [CrossRef]
93.
Lee, E.A. Cyber physical systems: Design challenges. In Proceedings of the 2008 11th IEEE International
Symposium on Object and Component-Oriented Real-Time Distributed Computing (ISORC), Orlando, FL,
USA, 5–7 May 2008; pp. 363–369.
94.
Barbosa, J.; Leitão, P.; Trentesaux, D.; Colombo, A.W.; Karnouskos, S. Cross beneﬁts from cyber-physical
systems and intelligent products for future smart industries. In Proceedings of the 2016 IEEE 14th International
Conference on Industrial Informatics (INDIN), Poitiers, France, 19–21 July 2016; pp. 504–509.
95.
Thoben, K.D.; Wiesner, S.; Wuest, T. “Industrie 4.0” and smart manufacturing-a review of research issues
and application examples. Int. J. Autom. Technol. 2017, 11, 4–16. [CrossRef]
96.
Lee, J.; Bagheri, B.; Jin, C. Introduction to cyber manufacturing. Manuf. Lett. 2016, 8, 11–15. [CrossRef]
97.
Available online: https://mxdusa.org/ (accessed on 24 May 2020).
98.
Zwolenski, M.; Weatherill, L. The digital universe: Rich data and the increasing value of the internet of
things. J. Telecommun. Digit. Econ. 2014, 2, 47. [CrossRef]
99.
Rong, H. Securing Manufacturing Computing and Controller Assets. Instrum. Stand. Metrol. 2010, 4, 16.
100. Buxmann, P.; Hess, T.; Ruggaber, R. Internet of services. Bus. Inf. Syst. Eng. 2009, 1, 341. [CrossRef]

--- [PAGE 32] ---
Designs 2020, 4, 17
32 of 39
101. Mabkhot, M.M.; Al-Ahmari, A.M.; Salah, B.; Alkhalefah, H. Requirements of the smart factory system:
A survey and perspective. Machine 2018, 6, 23. [CrossRef]
102. Wang, L. Cyber manufacturing: Research and applications. In Proceedings of the Tenth International
Symposium on Tools and Methods of Competitive Engineering, TMCE, Budapest, Hungary, 19–23 May 2014;
pp. 19–23.
103. Wang, L.; Törngren, M.; Onori, M. Current status and advancement of cyber-physical systems in
manufacturing. J. Manuf. Syst. 2015, 37, 517–527. [CrossRef]
104. Gilchrist, A. Industry 4.0: The Industrial Internet of Things; Apress: Berkeley, CA, USA, 2016.
105. Ghobakhloo, M.; Azar, A. Business excellence via advanced manufacturing technology and lean-agile
manufacturing. J. Manuf. Technol. Manag. 2018, 29, 2–24. [CrossRef]
106. Schlick, J.; Stephan, P.; Loskyll, M.; Lappe, D. Industrie 4.0 in der praktischen Anwendung. In Industrie 4.0 in
Produktion, Automatisierung und Logistik; Springer: Wiesbaden, Germany, 2014; pp. 57–84.
107. Gupta, P. Modularity enablers: A tool for Industry 4.0. Life Cycle Reliab. Saf. Eng. 2019, 8, 157–163. [CrossRef]
108. Lucke, D.; Constantinescu, C.; Westkämper, E. Smart Factory—A Step towards the Next Generation of
Manufacturing. In Manufacturing Systems and Technologies for the New Frontier; Mitsuishi, M., Ueda, K.,
Kimura, F., Eds.; Springer: London, UK, 2008; pp. 115–118.
109. Perales, D.P.; Valero, F.A.; García, A.B. Industry 4.0: A classiﬁcation scheme. In Closing the Gap Between
Practice and Research in Industrial Engineering; Viles, E., Ormazábal, M., Lleó, A., Eds.; Springer International
Publishing: Cham, Switzerland, 2018; pp. 343–350.
110. Available online: https://www.rmit.edu.au/industry/develop-your-workforce/tailored-workforce-solutions/
c4de/articles/industry-40-design-principles (accessed on 24 May 2020).
111. Lu, Y. Industry 4.0: A survey on technologies, applications and open research issues. J. Ind. Inf. Integr. 2017,
6, 1–10. [CrossRef]
112. Shariat Zadeh, N.; Lundholm, T.; Lindberg, L.; Franzén Sivard, G. Integration of digital factory with smart
factory based on Internet of Things. In Proceedings of the 26th CIRP Design Conference 2016, KTH Royal
Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden, 15–17 June 2016; Elsevier: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2016;
Volume 50, pp. 512–517.
113. Lasi, H.; Fettke, P.; Kemper, H.G.; Feld, T.; Hoﬀmann, M. Industry 4.0. Bus. Inf. Syst. Eng. 2014, 6, 239–242.
[CrossRef]
114. Shamim, S.; Cang, S.; Yu, H.; Li, Y. Examining the feasibilities of Industry 4.0 for the hospitality sector with
the lens of management practice. Energies 2017, 10, 499. [CrossRef]
115. Tantik, E.; Anderl, R. Integrated data model and structure for the asset administration shell in industrie 4.0.
Procedia Cirp 2017, 60, 86–91. [CrossRef]
116. Ruj, S.; Stojmenovic, M.; Nayak, A. Decentralized access control with anonymous authentication of data
stored in clouds. IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib. Syst. 2013, 25, 384–394. [CrossRef]
117. Moreno, A.; Velez, G.; Ardanza, A.; Barandiaran, I.; de Infante, Á.R.; Chopitea, R. Virtualisation process of
a sheet metal punching machine within the Industry 4.0 vision. Int. J. Interact. Des. Manuf. 2017, 11, 365–373.
[CrossRef]
118. Schleich, B.; Anwer, N.; Mathieu, L.; Wartzack, S. Shaping the digital twin for design and production
engineering. CIRP Ann. 2017, 66, 141–144. [CrossRef]
119. Tao, F.; Qi, Q. New IT driven service-oriented smart manufacturing: Framework and characteristics.
IEEE Trans. on Syst. Man Cybern. Syst. 2017, 49, 81–91. [CrossRef]
120. Schuh, G.; Stich, V.; Brosze, T.; Fuchs, S.; Pulz, C.; Quick, J.; Schürmeyer, M.; Bauhoﬀ, F. High resolution
supply chain management: Optimized processes based on self-optimizing control loops and real time data.
Prod. Eng. 2011, 5, 433–442. [CrossRef]
121. Dorozhkin, D.V.; Vance, J.M.; Rehn, G.D.; Lemessi, M. Coupling of interactive manufacturing operations
simulation and immersive virtual reality. Virtual Real. 2012, 16, 15–23. [CrossRef]
122. Nee, A.Y.; Ong, S.K. Virtual and augmented reality applications in manufacturing. IFAC Proc. Vol. 2013,
46, 15–26. [CrossRef]
123. Mujber, T.S.; Szecsi, T.; Hashmi, M.S. Virtual reality applications in manufacturing process simulation.
J. Mater. Process. Technol. 2004, 155, 1834–1838. [CrossRef]
124. Kühn-Kauﬀeldt, M.; Böttcher, J. Open Source Augmented Reality Applications for Small Manufacturing
Businesses. In Augmented Reality and Virtual Reality; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2020; pp. 243–251.

--- [PAGE 33] ---
Designs 2020, 4, 17
33 of 39
125. Damiani, L.; Demartini, M.; Guizzi, G.; Revetria, R.; Tonelli, F. Augmented and virtual reality applications
in industrial systems: A qualitative review towards the industry 4.0 era. IFAC-Pap. 2018, 51, 624–630.
[CrossRef]
126. Thames, L.; Schaefer, D. Industry 4.0:
An overview of key beneﬁts, technologies, and challenges.
In Cybersecurity for Industry 4.0; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2017; pp. 1–33.
127. Hofmann, E.; Rüsch, M. Industry 4.0 and the current status as well as future prospects on logistics.
Comput. Ind. 2017, 89, 23–34. [CrossRef]
128. Longo, F.; Nicoletti, L.; Padovano, A. Smart operators in industry 4.0: A human-centered approach to
enhance operators’ capabilities and competencies within the new smart factory context. Comput. Ind. Eng.
2017, 113, 144–159. [CrossRef]
129. Fischer, T.;
Gebauer, H.;
Fleisch, E. Service Business Development;
Cambridge University Press:
Cambridge, UK, 2012.
130. Trappey, A.J.; Trappey, C.V.; Fan, C.Y.; Hsu, A.P.; Li, X.K.; Lee, I.J. IoT patent roadmap for smart logistic
service provision in the context of Industry 4.0. J. Chin. Inst. Eng. 2017, 40, 593–602. [CrossRef]
131. Yao, X.; Jin, H.; Zhang, J. Towards a wisdom manufacturing vision. Int. J. Comput. Integr. Manuf. 2015,
28, 1291–1312. [CrossRef]
132. Von Rosing, M.; Von Scheel, H.; Scheer, A.W. The Complete Business Process Handbook: Body of Knowledge from
Process Modeling to BPM; Morgan Kaufmann Elsevier: Burlington, MA, USA, 2014; Volume 1.
133. Kirchmer, M. High Performance through Business Process Management; Springer: West Chester, PA, USA, 2017.
134. Hitchner, E. Reengineering the Corporation: A Manifesto for Business Revolution. Natl. Prod. Rev. 1993,
12, 443–449. [CrossRef]
135. Hammer, M. Deep change. Harv. Bus. Revie 2004, 82, 84–93.
136. Chan, P.S.; Peel, D. Causes and impact of reengineering. Bus. Process Manag. J. 1998, 4, 44–55. [CrossRef]
137. Kallio, J.; Saarinen, T.; Salo, S.; Tinnilä, M.; Vepsäläinen, A.P. Drivers and tracers of business process changes.
J. Strateg. Inf. Syst. 1999, 8, 125–142. [CrossRef]
138. Ponzi, L.; Koenig, M. Knowledge management: Another management fad. Inf. Res. 2002, 8, 145.
139. Ozcelik, Y. Do business process reengineering projects payoﬀ? Evidence from the United States. Int. J.
Proj. Manag. 2010, 28, 7–13. [CrossRef]
140. Qu, Y.; Ming, X.; Ni, Y.; Li, X.; Liu, Z.; Zhang, X.; Xie, L. An integrated framework of enterprise information
systems in smart manufacturing system via business process reengineering. Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng. Part B J.
Eng. Manuf. 2019, 233, 2210–2224. [CrossRef]
141. Zur Muehlen, M.; Indulska, M. Modeling languages for business processes and business rules:
A representational analysis. Inf. Syst. 2010, 35, 379–390. [CrossRef]
142. Rosemann, M.; vom Brocke, J. The six core elements of business process management. In Handbook on
Business Process Management 1; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2015; pp. 105–122.
143. Conger, S. Six sigma and business process management. In Handbook on Business Process Management 1;
Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2015; pp. 127–146.
144. Vermesan, O.; Friess, P.; Guillemin, P.; Gusmeroli, S.; Sundmaeker, H.; Bassi, A.; Jubert, I.S.; Mazura, M.;
Harrison, M.; Eisenhauer, M.; et al. Internet of things strategic research roadmap. Internet Things-Glob.
Technol. Soc. Trend 2011, 1, 9–52.
145. Fischer, L. BPM Everywhere: Internet of Things, Process of Everything; Future Strategies: Lighthouse Point, FL,
USA, 2015.
146. Del Giudice, M. Discovering the Internet of Things (IoT) within the business process management: A literature
review on technological revitalization. Bus. Proc. Manag. J. 2016, 22, 263–270. [CrossRef]
147. Telukdarie, A. Business Processes: A critical tool for Industry 4.0 enablement. In Proceedings of the 2019
International Conference on Fourth Industrial Revolution (ICFIR), Manama, Bahrain, 19–21 February 2019;
pp. 1–5.
148. Schoenthaler, F.; Augenstein, D.; Karle, T. Design and governance of collaborative business processes
in industry 4.0. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Cross-Organizational and Cross-Company BPM
(XOC-BPM) Co-Located with the 17th IEEE Conference on Business Informatics (CBI 2015), Lisbon, Portugal,
13–16 July 2015; p. 7.
149. Tupa, J.; Steiner, F. Industry 4.0 and business process management. Tech. Gaz. 2019, 13, 349–355. [CrossRef]

--- [PAGE 34] ---
Designs 2020, 4, 17
34 of 39
150. Rehse, J.R.; Dadashnia, S.; Fettke, P. Business process management for Industry 4.0–three application cases in
the DFKI-smart-lego-factory. it-Inf. Technol. 2018, 60, 133–141. [CrossRef]
151. Grefen, P.; Ludwig, H.; Tata, S.; Dijkman, R.; Baracaldo, N.; Wilbik, A.; D’hondt, T. September.
Complex collaborative physical process management: A position on the trinity of BPM, IoT and DA.
In Working Conference on Virtual Enterprises; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2018; pp. 244–253.
152. Secundo, G.; Toma, A.; Schiuma, G.; Passiante, G. Knowledge transfer in open innovation. Bus. Process
Manag. J. 2019, 25, 144–163. [CrossRef]
153. Christenson, J.K.; O’Kane, G.M.; Farmery, A.K.; McManus, A. The barriers and drivers of seafood consumption
in Australia: A narrative literature review. Int. J. Consum. Stud. 2017, 41, 299–311. [CrossRef]
154. Neumann, F. Antecedents and eﬀects of emotions in strategic decision-making: A literature review and
conceptual model. Manag. Rev. Q. 2017, 67, 175–200. [CrossRef]
155. de Camargo Fiorini, P.; Jabbour, C.J.C. Information systems and sustainable supply chain management
towards a more sustainable society: Where we are and where we are going. Int. J. Inf. Manag. 2017,
37, 241–249. [CrossRef]
156. Viriyasitavat, W.; Da Xu, L.; Bi, Z.; Sapsomboon, A. Blockchain-based business process management (BPM)
framework for service composition in industry 4.0. J. Intell. Manuf. 2018, 1–12. [CrossRef]
157. Xu, L.D.; Xu, E.L.; Li, L. Industry 4.0: State of the art and future trends. Int. J. Prod. Res. 2018, 56, 2941–2962.
[CrossRef]
158. Hitpass, B.; Astudillo, H. Industry 4.0 challenges for business process management and electronic-commerce.
J. Theor. Appl. Electron. Commer. Res. 2019, 14, I–III. [CrossRef]
159. Chiu, Y.C.; Cheng, F.T.; Huang, H.C. Developing a factory-wide intelligent predictive maintenance system
based on Industry 4.0. J. Chin. Inst. Eng. 2017, 40, 562–571. [CrossRef]
160. Wortmann, A.; Combemale, B.; Barais, O. A systematic mapping study on modeling for industry 4.0.
In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM/IEEE 20th International Conference on Model Driven Engineering Languages
and Systems (MODELS), Austin, TX, USA, 17–22 September 2017; pp. 281–291.
161. Telukdarie, A.; Buhulaiga, E.; Bag, S.; Gupta, S.; Luo, Z. Industry 4.0 implementation for multinationals.
Process Saf. Environ. Prot. 2018, 118, 316–329. [CrossRef]
162. Tonelli, F.; Demartini, M.; Loleo, A.; Testa, C. A novel methodology for manufacturing ﬁrms value modeling
and mapping to improve operational performance in the industry 4.0 era. Procedia CIRP 2016, 57, 122–127.
[CrossRef]
163. Saraeian, S.; Shirazi, B.; Motameni, H. Towards an extended BPMS prototype: Open challenges of BPM to
ﬂexible and robust orchestrate of uncertain processes. Comput. Stand. Interface 2018, 57, 1–19. [CrossRef]
164. Kannengiesser, U.; Müller, H. Industry 4.0 Standardisation: Where Does S-BPM Fit? In Proceedings of the
10th International Conference on Subject-Oriented Business Process Management, Linz, Austria, 5 April 2018;
pp. 1–8.
165. Available online:
https://www.ntuclearninghub.com/mapping-the-mind-of-worker-4-0/ (accessed on
24 May 2020).
166. Romero, D.; Bernus, P.; Noran, O.; Stahre, J.; Fast-Berglund, Å. The operator 4.0: Human cyber-physical
systems & adaptive automation towards human-automation symbiosis work systems. In IFIP International
Conference on Advances in Production Management Systems; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2016; pp. 677–686.
167. Segura, Á.; Diez, H.V.; Barandiaran, I.; Arbelaiz, A.; Álvarez, H.; Simões, B.; Posada, J.; García-Alonso, A.;
Ugarte, R. Visual computing technologies to support the Operator 4.0. Comput. Ind. Eng. 2020, 139, 105550.
[CrossRef]
168. Romero, D.; Stahre, J.; Wuest, T.; Noran, O.; Bernus, P.; Fast-Berglund, Å.; Gorecky, D. Towards an operator
4.0 typology: A human-centric perspective on the fourth industrial revolution technologies. In Proceedings
of the International Conference on Computers and Industrial Engineering (CIE46), Tianjin, China,
29–31 October 2016; pp. 29–31.
169. Ruppert, T.; Jaskó, S.; Holczinger, T.; Abonyi, J. Enabling technologies for operator 4.0: A survey. Appl. Sci.
2018, 8, 1650. [CrossRef]
170. Romero, D.; Wuest, T.; Stahre, J.; Gorecky, D. Social factory architecture: Social networking services and
production scenarios through the social internet of things, services and people for the social operator 4.0.
In IFIP International Conference on Advances in Production Management Systems; Springer: Cham, Switzerland,
2017; pp. 265–273.

--- [PAGE 35] ---
Designs 2020, 4, 17
35 of 39
171. Kaasinen, E.; Schmalfuß, F.; Özturk, C.; Aromaa, S.; Boubekeur, M.; Heilala, J.; Heikkilä, P.; Kuula, T.;
Liinasuo, M.; Mach, S.; et al. Empowering and engaging industrial workers with Operator 4.0 solutions.
Comput. Ind. Eng. 2020, 139, 105678. [CrossRef]
172. Mattsson, S.; Fast-Berglund, Å.; Li, D.; Thorvald, P. Forming a cognitive automation strategy for Operator 4.0
in complex assembly. Comput. Ind. Eng. 2020, 139, 105360. [CrossRef]
173. Tupa, J.; Simota, J.; Steiner, F. Aspects of risk management implementation for Industry 4.0. Procedia Manuf.
2017, 11, 1223–1230. [CrossRef]
174. Niesen, T.; Houy, C.; Fettke, P.; Loos, P. Towards an integrative big data analysis framework for data-driven
risk management in industry 4.0. In Proceedings of the 2016 49th Hawaii International Conference on System
Sciences (HICSS), Koloa, HI, USA, 5–8 January 2016; pp. 5065–5074.
175. Schröder, M.; Indorf, M.; Kersten, W. Industry 4.0 and its impact on supply chain risk management.
In Proceedings of the 14th International Conference “Reliability and Statistics in Transportation and
Communication”, Riga, Latvia, 15–18 October 2014; pp. 114–125.
176. Ivanov, D.; Dolgui, A.; Sokolov, B. The impact of digital technology and Industry 4.0 on the ripple eﬀect and
supply chain risk analytics. Int. J. Prod. Res. 2019, 57, 829–846. [CrossRef]
177. Leonhardt, F.;
Wiedemann, A. Realigning Risk Management in the Light of Industry 4.0;
SSRN:
Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2015.
178. Birkel, H.S.; Veile, J.W.; Müller, J.M.; Hartmann, E.; Voigt, K.I. Development of a risk framework for Industry
4.0 in the context of sustainability for established manufacturers. Sustainability 2019, 11, 384. [CrossRef]
179. Badri, A.; Boudreau-Trudel, B.; Souissi, A.S. Occupational health and safety in the industry 4.0 era: A cause
for major concern? Saf. Sci. 2018, 109, 403–411. [CrossRef]
180. Bonekamp, L.; Sure, M. Consequences of Industry 4.0 on human labour and work organisation. J. Bus. Media
Psychol. 2015, 6, 33–40.
181. de Sousa Jabbour, A.B.L.; Jabbour, C.J.C.; Foropon, C.; Godinho Filho, M. When titans meet–Can industry
4.0 revolutionise the environmentally-sustainable manufacturing wave? The role of critical success factors.
Technol. Forecast. Soc. Chang 2018, 132, 18–25. [CrossRef]
182. Glas, A.H.; Kleemann, F.C. The impact of industry 4.0 on procurement and supply management: A conceptual
and qualitative analysis. Int. J. Bus. Manag. Invent. 2016, 5, 55–66.
183. Trstenjak, M.; Cosic, P. Process planning in Industry 4.0 environment. Procedia Manuf. 2017, 11, 1744–1750.
[CrossRef]
184. Gilchrist, A. Introducing Industry 4.0. In Industry 4.0; Apress: Berkeley, CA, USA, 2016; pp. 195–215.
185. Hecklau, F.; Galeitzke, M.; Flachs, S.; Kohl, H. Holistic approach for human resource management in Industry
4.0. Procedia Cirp 2016, 54, 1–6. [CrossRef]
186. Schneider, P. Managerial challenges of Industry 4.0: An empirically backed research agenda for a nascent
ﬁeld. Rev. Manag. Sci. 2018, 12, 803–848. [CrossRef]
187. Prifti, L.; Knigge, M.; Kienegger, H.; Krcmar, H. A Competency Model for “Industrie 4.0” Employees.
In Proceedings of the der 13. Internationalen Tagung Wirtschaftsinformatik (WI 2017), St. Gallen, Bodensee,
Switzerland, 12–15 February 2017; pp. 46–60.
188. Schallock, B.; Rybski, C.; Jochem, R.; Kohl, H. Learning Factory for Industry 4.0 to provide future skills
beyond technical training. Procedia Manuf. 2018, 23, 27–32. [CrossRef]
189. Akdil, K.Y.; Ustundag, A.; Cevikcan, E. Maturity and readiness model for industry 4.0 strategy. In Industry
4.0: Managing the Digital Transformation; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2018; pp. 61–94.
190. Rao, S.K.; Prasad, R. Impact of 5G technologies on industry 4.0. Wirel. Pers. Commun. 2018, 100, 145–159.
[CrossRef]
191. Brettel, M.; Friederichsen, N.; Keller, M.; Rosenberg, M. How virtualization, decentralization and network
building change the manufacturing landscape: An Industry 4.0 Perspective. Int. J. Mech. Ind. Sci. Eng. 2014,
8, 37–44.
192. de Man, J.C.; Strandhagen, J.O. An Industry 4.0 research agenda for sustainable business models. Procedia Cirp
2017, 63, 721–726. [CrossRef]
193. Schröder, C. The Challenges of Industry 4.0 for Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises; Friedrich-Ebert-Stiftung:
Bonn, Germany, 2016.
194. Agrawal, A.; Schaefer, S.; Funke, T. Incorporating Industry 4.0 in Corporate Strategy. In Analyzing the Impacts
of Industry 4.0 in Modern Business Environments; IGI global: Hershey, PA, USA, 2018; pp. 161–176.

--- [PAGE 36] ---
Designs 2020, 4, 17
36 of 39
195. Jayaram, A. Lean six sigma approach for global supply chain management using industry 4.0 and IIoT.
In Proceedings of the 2016 2nd International Conference on Contemporary Computing and Informatics
(IC3I), Noida, India, 14–17 December 2016; pp. 89–94.
196. Buer, S.V.; Strandhagen, J.O.; Chan, F.T. The link between Industry 4.0 and lean manufacturing: Mapping
current research and establishing a research agenda. Int. J. Prod. Res. 2018, 56, 2924–2940.
197. Davies, R.; Coole, T.; Smith, A. Review of socio-technical considerations to ensure successful implementation
of Industry 4.0. Procedia Manuf. 2017, 11, 1288–1295.
198. Arcidiacono, G.; Pieroni, A. The Revolution Lean Six Sigma 4.0. Int. J. Adv. Sci. Eng. Inf. Technol. 2018,
8, 141–149.
199. Rüttimann, B.G.; Stöckli, M.T. Lean and Industry 4.0—twins, partners, or contenders? A due clariﬁcation
regarding the supposed clash of two production systems. J. Serv. Sci. Manag. 2016, 9, 485–500. [CrossRef]
200. Vancil, R.F.; Lorange, P. Strategic planning in diversiﬁed companies. Harv. Bus. Rev. 1975, 53, 81–90.
201. Jackson, S.E.; Joshi, A.; Erhardt, N.L. Recent research on team and organizational diversity: SWOT analysis
and implications. J. Manag. 2003, 29, 801–830.
202. Daum, M.; Götz, M.; Domaschka, J. Integrating CEP and BPM: How CEP realizes functional requirements of
BPM applications (industry article). In Proceedings of the 6th ACM International Conference on Distributed
Event-Based Systems, Berlin, Germany, 16 July 2012; pp. 157–166.
203. Pavlovski, C.J.; Zou, J. Non-Functional Requirements in Business Process Modeling. In Proceedings of
the 5th Asia-Paciﬁc Conference on Conceptual Modelling (APCCM2008), Wollongong, New South Wales,
Australia, 22–25 January 2008; pp. 103–112.
204. Mouritsen, J.; Mahama, H.; Chua, W.F. 12 Actor-Network Theory and the Study of Inter-Organisational
Network-Relations. Account. Netw. 2010, 7, 292.
205. Xue, H.; Mason, D.S. The changing stakeholder map of formula one grand prix in Shanghai. Eur. Sport
Manag. Quart. 2011, 11, 371–395. [CrossRef]
206. Venkatraman, S.; Venkatraman, R. Process Innovation and Improvement Using Business Object-Oriented
Process Modelling (BOOPM) Framework. Appl. Syst. Innov. 2019, 2, 23. [CrossRef]
207. Salgado, C.E.;
Machado, R.J.;
Maciel, R.S. Using process-level use case diagrams to infer the
business motivation model with a RUP-based approach. In Information System Development; Springer:
Cham, Switzerland, 2014; pp. 123–134.
208. Available online: https://medium.com/pm101/8-ﬂowcharts-and-diagrams-apps-837373859e87 (accessed on
26 April 2020).
209. Wohed, P.; van der Aalst, W.M.; Dumas, M.; ter Hofstede, A.H.; Russell, N. On the suitability of BPMN
for business process modelling.
In International Conference on Business Process Management; Springer:
Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2006; pp. 161–176.
210. Meudt, T.; Metternich, J.; Abele, E. Value stream mapping 4.0: Holistic examination of value stream and
information logistics in production. Cirp Ann. 2017, 66, 413–416. [CrossRef]
211. Bauer, K. KPIs-The metrics that drive performance management. Inf. Manag. 2004, 14, 63.
212. Bauer, K. KPIs: Not all metrics are created equal. Inf. Manag. 2004, 14, 42.
213. Davies, J.; Haubenstock, M. Building eﬀective indicators to monitor operational risk. RMA J. 2002, 84, 40–43.
214. Scandizzo, S. Risk mapping and key risk indicators in operational risk management. Econ. Note 2005,
34, 231–256. [CrossRef]
215. Davies, J.; Finlay, M.; McLenaghen, T.; Wilson, D. Key risk indicators–their role in operational risk management
and measurement. ARM Risk Bus. Int. Prague 2006, 1–32. Available online: http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/
viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.457.893&rep=rep1&type=pdf (accessed on 26 April 2020).
216. Rosenberg, A.; Chase, G.; Omar, R.; Taylor, J.; von Rosing, M. Applying Real-World BPM in an SAP Environment;
Galileo Press: Cambridge, UK, 2011.
217. Brundage, M.P.; Bernstein, W.Z.; Morris, K.C.; Horst, J.A. Using graph-based visualizations to explore key
performance indicator relationships for manufacturing production systems. Procedia Cirp 2017, 61, 451–456.
[CrossRef]
218. Available
online:
https://opsdog.com/resources/key-risk-indicators-examples-kris-technology-risk-
management/ (accessed on 26 April 2020).

--- [PAGE 37] ---
Designs 2020, 4, 17
37 of 39
219. Del-Río-Ortega, A.; Resinas, M.; Ruiz-Cortés, A. October.
Deﬁning process performance indicators:
An ontological approach. In OTM Confederated International Conferences “On the Move to Meaningful Internet
Systems”; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2010; pp. 555–572.
220. Available online: https://www.minit.io/blog/5-critical-process-performance-indicators-and-how-process-
mining-can-help-you-track-them (accessed on 26 April 2020).
221. Del-RíO-Ortega, A.; Resinas, M.; Cabanillas, C.; Ruiz-Cortés, A. On the deﬁnition and design-time analysis
of process performance indicators. Inf. Syst. 2013, 38, 470–490. [CrossRef]
222. Thompson, J.D. Organizations in Action: Social Science Bases of Administrative Theory; Transaction Publishers:
Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2003.
223. Available online: https://www.samewave.com/posts/understand-the-three-types-of-task-interdependence-
and-why-they-matter (accessed on 26 April 2020).
224. Khan, M.A.A.; Butt, J.; Mebrahtu, H.; Shirvani, H.; Sanaei, A.; Alam, M.N. Integration of Data-Driven
Process Re-Engineering and Process Interdependence for Manufacturing Optimization Supported by Smart
Structured Data. Design 2019, 3, 44. [CrossRef]
225. Modarress, B.; Ansari, A.; Lockwood, D.L. Kaizen costing for lean manufacturing: A case study. Int. J.
Prod. Res. 2005, 43, 1751–1760. [CrossRef]
226. Akay, D.; Demıray, A.; Kurt, M. Collaborative tool for solving human factors problems in the manufacturing
environment: The Theory of Inventive Problem Solving Technique (TRIZ) method. Int. J. Prod. Res. 2008,
46, 2913–2925. [CrossRef]
227. Butt, J.; Jedi, S. Redesign of an In-Market Conveyor System for Manufacturing Cost Reduction and Design
Eﬃciency Using DFMA Methodology. Designs 2020, 4, 6. [CrossRef]
228. Lee, J.; Lapira, E.; Bagheri, B.; Kao, H.A. Recent advances and trends in predictive manufacturing systems in
big data environment. Manuf. Lett. 2013, 1, 38–41. [CrossRef]
229. Lee, J.; Ardakani, H.D.; Yang, S.; Bagheri, B. Industrial big data analytics and cyber-physical systems for
future maintenance & service innovation. Procedia Cirp 2015, 38, 3–7.
230. Weyer, S.; Schmitt, M.; Ohmer, M.; Gorecky, D. Towards Industry 4.0-Standardization as the crucial challenge
for highly modular, multi-vendor production systems. IFAC-Pap. 2015, 48, 579–584. [CrossRef]
231. Truong, H.Q.; Hara, Y. Supply chain risk management: Manufacturing-and service-oriented ﬁrms. J. Manuf.
Technol. Manag. 2018, 29, 218–239.
232. Available online: https://simplicable.com/new/risk-management-vs-contingency-planning (accessed on
29 April 2020).
233. Ruiz-Torres, A.J.; Mahmoodi, F.; Zeng, A.Z. Supplier selection model with contingency planning for supplier
failures. Comput. Ind. Eng. 2013, 66, 374–382. [CrossRef]
234. Castelo-Branco, I.; Cruz-Jesus, F.; Oliveira, T. Assessing Industry 4.0 readiness in manufacturing: Evidence
for the European Union. Comput. Ind. 2019, 107, 22–32. [CrossRef]
235. Samaranayake, P.; Ramanathan, K.; Laosirihongthong, T. Implementing industry 4.0—A technological
readiness perspective. In Proceedings of the 2017 IEEE International Conference on Industrial Engineering
and Engineering Management (IEEM), Singapore, 10–13 December 2017; pp. 529–533.
236. Mittelmann, A. Competence development for Work 4.0. In Knowledge Management in Digital Change; Springer:
Cham, Switzerland, 2018; pp. 263–275.
237. Beckett, R.; Daberkow, T. Work 4.0 and the Need for Boundary-Spanning. J. World Bus. 2020, 5, 28–2020.
238. Karacay, G. Talent development for Industry 4.0. In Industry 4.0: Managing the Digital Transformation; Springer:
Cham, Switzerland, 2018; pp. 123–136.
239. Oztemel, E.; Gursev, S. Literature review of Industry 4.0 and related technologies. J. Intell. Manuf. 2020,
31, 127–182. [CrossRef]
240. Gentner, S. Industry 4.0: Reality, future or just science ﬁction? How to convince today’s management to
invest in tomorrow’s future! Successful strategies for industry 4.0 and manufacturing IT. Chim. Int. J. Chem.
2016, 70, 628–633. [CrossRef]
241. Chen, H.; Chiang, R.H.; Storey, V.C. Business intelligence and analytics: From big data to big impact. MIS Q.
2012, 36, 1165–1188. [CrossRef]
242. Myers, K.; Berry, P.; Blythe, J.; Conley, K.; Gervasio, M.; McGuinness, D.L.; Morley, D.; Pfeﬀer, A.; Pollack, M.;
Tambe, M. An intelligent personal assistant for task and time management. Ai Mag. 2007, 28, 47.
243. Available online: https://en.unesco.org/themes/futures-literacy (accessed on 25 May 2020).

--- [PAGE 38] ---
Designs 2020, 4, 17
38 of 39
244. Todnem By, R. Organisational change management: A critical review. J. Chang. Manag. 2005, 5, 369–380.
245. Lorenzi, N.M.; Riley, R.T. Organizational issues= change. Int. J. Med. Inform. 2003, 69, 197–203. [CrossRef]
246. Bartik, A.W.; Bertrand, M.; Cullen, Z.B.; Glaeser, E.L.; Luca, M.; Stanton, C.T. How are Small Businesses
Adjusting to COVID-19? Early Evidence from a Survey (No. w26989); National Bureau of Economic Research:
Cambridge, MA, USA, 2020.
247. Available online: https://www.strategy-business.com/article/rr00006?gko=dab72 (accessed on 25 May 2020).
248. Hlupic,
V.;
Pouloudi,
A.;
Rzevski,
G.
Towards
an
integrated
approach
to
knowledge
management:‘hard’,‘soft’and ‘abstract’issues. Knowl. Process Manag. 2002, 9, 90–102. [CrossRef]
249. Gill, R. Change management–or change leadership? J. Chang. Manag. 2002, 3, 307–318. [CrossRef]
250. Levasseur, R.E. People skills: Change management tools—Lewin’s change model. Interface 2001, 31, 71–73.
251. Hussain, S.T.; Lei, S.; Akram, T.; Haider, M.J.; Hussain, S.H.; Ali, M. Kurt Lewin’s change model: A critical
review of the role of leadership and employee involvement in organizational change. J. Innov. Knowledg
2018, 3, 123–127. [CrossRef]
252. Hiatt, J. ADKAR: A Model for Change in Business, Government, and Our Community; Prosci Learning Center
Publications: Loveland, CO, USA, 2006.
253. Boca, G.D. Adkar model VS. quality management change. In International Conference Risk in Contemporary
Economy; Faculty of Economics and Business Administration, Dunarea de Jos University of Galati:
Galati, Romania, 2013.
254. CHANGE, C.V. Technology Adoption: Managing Change. Prim. Psychiatry 2006, 13, 20–23.
255. Ashkenas, R. Change management needs to change. Harv. Bus. Rev. 2013, 3, 20–23.
256. Welbourne, T.M. Change management needs a change. Employ. Relat. Toda 2014, 41, 17–23. [CrossRef]
257. Available online: https://www.forbes.com/sites/forbestechcouncil/2019/06/18/change-management-needs-
change-management/#687e91ab6656 (accessed on 25 May 2020).
258. Schmidt, R.; Möhring, M.; Härting, R.C.; Reichstein, C.; Neumaier, P.; Jozinovi´c, P. Industry 4.0-potentials
for creating smart products: Empirical research results. In International Conference on Business Information
Systems; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2015; pp. 16–27.
259. Henderson, S.C.; Swamidass, P.M.; Byrd, T.A. Empirical models of the eﬀect of integrated manufacturing on
manufacturing performance and return on investment. Int. J. Prod. Res. 2004, 42, 1933–1954. [CrossRef]
260. Phillips, J.J.; Marston, M. Measuring ROI. Fad fact Fantasy 2007, 61, 42.
261. Phillips, J.J.; Phillips, P.P. Measuring ROI in executive coaching. Int. J. Coach. Organ. 2005, 3, 53–62.
262. Phillips, J.J.; Phillips, P. Using ROI to demonstrate performance value in the public sector. Perform. Improv.
2009, 48, 22–28. [CrossRef]
263. Phillips, J.J.; Phillips, P.P. Distinguishing ROI myths from reality. Perform. Improv. 2008, 47, 12–17. [CrossRef]
264. Boehm, B.; Huang, L.; Jain, A.; Madachy, R. The ROI of software dependability: The iDAVE model. IEEE Softw.
2004, 21, 54–61. [CrossRef]
265. Naim, M.M.; Wikner, J.; Grubbström, R.W. A net present value assessment of make-to-order and make-to-stock
manufacturing systems. Omeg 2007, 35, 524–532. [CrossRef]
266. Available online: https://sixsigmastudyguide.com/pilot-plan/ (accessed on 30 April 2020).
267. Antony, J.; Kumar, M.; Labib, A. Gearing Six Sigma into UK manufacturing SMEs: Results from a pilot study.
J. Oper. Res. Soc. 2008, 59, 482–493. [CrossRef]
268. Georgoulias, K.; Papakostas, N.; Chryssolouris, G.; Stanev, S.; Krappe, H.; Ovtcharova, J. Evaluation of
ﬂexibility for the eﬀective change management of manufacturing organizations. Robot. Comput.-Integr. Manuf.
2009, 25, 888–893. [CrossRef]
269. Leach, L. Schedule and cost buﬀer sizing: How to account for the bias between project performance and
your model. Proj. Manag. J. 2003, 34, 34–47. [CrossRef]
270. May, G.; Stahl, B. The signiﬁcance of organizational change management for sustainable competitiveness in
manufacturing: Exploring the ﬁrm archetypes. Int. J. Prod. Res. 2017, 55, 4450–4465. [CrossRef]
271. Rüßmann, M.; Lorenz, M.; Gerbert, P.; Waldner, M.; Justus, J.; Engel, P.; Harnisch, M. Industry 4.0: The future
of productivity and growth in manufacturing industries. Boston Consult. Group 2015, 9, 54–89.
272. Harmon, P.; Trends, B.P. Business Process Change: A Guide for Business Managers and BPM and Six Sigma
Professionals; Elsevier: Waltham, MA, USA, 2010; ISBN 978-0-12-374152-3.

--- [PAGE 39] ---
Designs 2020, 4, 17
39 of 39
273. Skalle, H.; Hahn, B. Applying Lean, Six Sigma, BPM, and SOA to Drive Business Results; IBM Corporation:
Armonk, NY, USA, 2013.
274. LaFollette, W.H. BPM, lean and six sigma-all together now. Lean Six Sigma Rev. 2015, 15, 23.
© 2020 by the author. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
