
--- [PAGE 1] ---
German Journal of 
Human Resource Management
﻿1­–26
© The Author(s) 2022
Article reuse guidelines: 
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
DOI: 10.1177/23970022221087252
journals.sagepub.com/home/gjh
Leadership competencies for 
digital transformation: An 
exploratory content analysis  
of job advertisements
Katharina Gilli 
Free University of Bozen-Bolzano, Italy
Michael Nippa
Free University of Bozen-Bolzano, Italy
Michael Knappstein
ISM International School of Management, Germany
Abstract
Harnessing the opportunities of emerging information technologies is one of the great challenges 
companies are facing today. To successfully master digital transformation, organizations need 
leaders who can grasp the opportunities of digitalization for their business and transform them 
into new business models. Aiming at providing empirical evidence regarding competencies sought 
by practitioners for managing digital transformation, we analyze 239 job advertisements targeting 
digital transformation experts and examine the skills and traits explicitly called for. Our results 
reveal that technical skills and in-depth expertise in information technologies play only a secondary 
role in job requirement profiles. Like in earlier strategic change processes, digital transformation 
experts should primarily possess collaboration, strategic thinking, leadership, customer orientation, 
and communication skills. Moreover, in contrast to purely conceptual studies limited to skills and 
abilities, our analyses emphasize the importance of specific personality traits, such as proactivity and 
creativity, since these are often explicitly mentioned in corresponding job advertisements.
Keywords
Change management, digital transformation, job advertisements, leadership, personality traits, 
skills
Corresponding author:
Katharina Gilli, Free University of Bozen-Bolzano, Piazza Università, 1, Bolzano I-39100, Italy. 
Email: katharina.gilli@unibz.it
1087252 GJH0010.1177/23970022221087252German Journal of Human Resource ManagementGilli et al.
research-article2022
Article

--- [PAGE 2] ---
2	
German Journal of Human Resource Management 00(0)
Introduction
Due to rapid developments in digital technology, we are facing a new era characterized 
by high uncertainty and disruption. In the working environment, these developments 
based on advanced information and communication technology (ICT) recently associ-
ated with keywords such as internet of things, industry 4.0, augmented reality, machine 
learning, artificial intelligence, and big data spur extensive transformations of organiza-
tions (Porter and Heppelmann, 2015; Tapscott, 2015; Weill and Woerner, 2015). As the 
pace of digital transformation is expected to even accelerate in the future, it is challeng-
ing the survival of many firms and industries (Bawany, 2020; Fitzgerald et al., 2013; 
Hess et al., 2016).
Digital transformation (DT), defined as “a process that aims to improve an entity by 
triggering significant changes to its properties through combinations of information, 
computing, communication, and connectivity technologies” (Vial, 2019: 3), is charac-
terized by velocity and a holistic nature (Hartl and Hess, 2017). DT does not only 
affect product and service offerings of organizations, but their organizational pro-
cesses, systems, and operations, too (e.g., Bohnsack et al., 2018; Strohmeier, 2020; 
Vial, 2019). Consequently, it requires an organization-wide change program, which 
embraces all impact factors from new strategic initiatives to detailed human resource 
management measures such as personnel selection, incentivization, or specialized 
training, to be successful.
By enabling managers and leaders1 to rethink and to reshape for example customer 
value propositions and to renew organizational structures and processes resulting in the 
creation of new business models (Berman, 2012; Hess et al., 2016), DT can radically 
improve a company’s performance (Bekkhus, 2016; Vale-Feigl, 2021). This poses major 
challenges for managers. Not only do they have to monitor technological developments 
and decide which of them represent a threat or an opportunity to their business, but at the 
same time they must evaluate how they might alter customer needs, product and service 
specifications, and consequently organizational structures and processes. Such a com-
prehensive and far-reaching change process furthermore involves the management of 
paradoxes such as the active involvement of employees who resist organizational and 
individual changes (Kane et al., 2019; Miller and Dess, 1996).
Against this backdrop, previous studies have highlighted the importance of develop-
ing digital competencies for future business success (Hoberg et al., 2015; Sia et al., 2016; 
Vial, 2019). Moreover, there is ample evidence that many DT processes have failed due 
to the lack of leadership skills rather than the primary lack of knowledge about digital 
technologies (Burke, 2008; Deloitte, 2017).
The general importance of leaders for the success of DT seems to be well substanti-
ated (e.g., Lenkenhoff et al., 2018; Li et al., 2018; Vasconcelos et al., 2016; Vial, 2019; 
Voigt et al., 2014). However, the question arises as to which specific leadership compe-
tencies and skills companies and public administrations need to successfully manage the 
fundamental transformation in the digital age. A recent literature review by Eberl and 
Drews (2021) found that the most mentioned attributes of leaders in the digital age are: 
being visionary, digitally savvy, highly collaborative, adaptable, and motivating. Other 

--- [PAGE 3] ---
Gilli et al.	
3
authors propose that they should act as role models by fostering a supportive attitude 
toward change (Bondarouk and Ruël, 2008; Paulin, 2014; Sow and Aborbie, 2018) and 
by ensuring that employees have digital know-how (Day et al., 2014). Additionally, and 
partially overlapping, the relevance of personal traits such as being visionary, creative, 
selfless, and flexible has been highlighted (Beeks, 2012; Kane et al., 2019; Mihardjo 
et al., 2019). The first impression that these are general, conceptually derived wish lists 
is reinforced by a closer analysis of the literature reviews on this topic (e.g., Eberl and 
Drews, 2021; Guzmán et al., 2020; Klein, 2020; Vial, 2019).
What is lacking so far, with rare exceptions, are studies that analyze actual job require-
ment profiles for leaders of the DT and compare them to these conceptual models. 
Focusing the analysis on what employers and their HR departments—considering their 
specific company context—have identified as necessary characteristics of an ideal can-
didate offers complementary advantages over other empirical methods (Harper, 2012). 
This is even more true for organizations that are at the beginning of their transformation 
process and need the right managers to avoid failure in lieu of the far-reaching effects of 
DT and its strategic relevance and cannot afford a miscast. It can be assumed that HRM 
managers entrusted with this staffing will define the requirements very carefully and 
obtain external expertise. This focus also allows for a better separation of positions and 
competencies that are more concerned with technical aspects of DT (e.g. cloud comput-
ing, big data analytics) from those that are supposed to orchestrate the necessary and 
comprehensive organizational change process. Against this background, studies analyz-
ing the content of job advertisements can enrich conceptual and practical knowledge 
about leadership competencies needed for successfully mastering DT processes.
While there are a few relevant studies that have examined required skills by focus-
ing on certain profiles such as chief digital officers or chief technical officers (Reck 
and Fliaster, 2019; Singh and Hess, 2017; Wade and Obwegeser, 2019) or have used 
rather small (Sousa and Rocha, 2019) or national samples (Porfírio et al., 2021; Zeike 
et al., 2019), to our best knowledge, there is only one study which has analyzed leader-
ship requirements for DT based on job advertisements (Klus and Müller, 2020). 
However, as it focuses on just one specific region in Germany, generalizability of 
results may be limited.
Hence, following calls for providing empirical evidence from a larger, international 
sample (Guzmán et al., 2020; Sousa and Rocha, 2019), the objective of this study is to 
explore and to categorize leadership competencies for DT which are considered neces-
sary by practitioners. To draw robust conclusions for research and practice, accordingly, 
239 job advertisements have been analyzed by means of a content analysis. Additionally, 
we determined the extent to which skills and traits of leaders sought by practitioners to 
manage DT match competencies identified in conceptual studies.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. In the first section, we revisit 
concepts related to leadership competencies to develop a conceptual framework for our 
empirical approach. In the subsequent section, readers are provided with important infor-
mation regarding the methodology applied. After the presentation of the results, they will 
be discussed with a special attention to the comparison between the requirements 
demanded by practitioners and those developed in conceptual studies.

--- [PAGE 4] ---
4	
German Journal of Human Resource Management 00(0)
Concepts related to leadership competencies
Task and job descriptions and related skill requirements (e.g., Hackman and Lawler, 
1971; Hackman and Oldham, 1976; Mumford, 1972) as well as leadership skills and 
personality traits (Mumford et al., 2000; Yukl, 1981) have been studied by management 
scholars for decades resulting in an abundance of both complementary and competing 
concepts and findings. Although it is not the purpose of this study to provide a compre-
hensive literature review in the specific field of leadership skills (Yammarino, 2013; 
Yukl, 2012, 2013), we conduct a selective overview of leadership skill conceptualiza-
tions in search of an appropriate framework for systematically analyzing the empirical 
data collected. After introducing the concept of so-called 21st century skills, a selective 
overview of general leadership skill conceptualizations is provided.
Twenty-first century skills
As the name of this skill set suggests, the concept of 21st century skills attempts to derive 
important leadership and working skills from trends such as globalization, digitalization 
and increase of knowledge work. To fulfill increasingly complex tasks, organizations 
need highly skilled workers, which are expected to efficiently generate new knowledge 
from an exponentially growing amount of available information and effectively apply it 
to interconnected problems (Van Laar et al., 2017). The 21st century skill sets have been 
developed especially for educational purposes as to develop basic skills needed in the 
future to compete on a global scale and have been concerned with national competitive-
ness. These skill sets have been suggested by different organizations. Among them, 
Partnership for 21st Century Skills (2008), which proposed three types of 21st century 
skills: learning skills (creativity and innovation, critical thinking and problem solving, 
communication and collaboration), literacy skills (information, media and ICT literacy), 
and life skills (flexibility and adaptability, initiative and self-direction, social and cross-
cultural skills, productivity and accountability, leadership and responsibility). Later, it 
has been suggested to include digital literacy, citizenship, and productivity as important 
21st century skills (Voogt and Roblin, 2012).
Even if the concept of 21st century skills is supposed to prepare the next generation 
for future work challenges, it does not provide an appropriate framework to guide the 
search for leadership competencies needed for DT. The digital aspects associated with 
21st century skills are not yet sufficiently defined and, in contrast to digital skills, 21st 
century skills are not necessarily linked to applications of advanced ICT, particularly in 
the business context (Van Laar et al., 2017).2
Leadership competencies: Skills and traits
According to the seminal work of Boyatzis (1982), management and leadership compe-
tencies, including traits, self-concept, social role, knowledge, and skills, provide the 
foundation for successfully performing tasks or achieving goals that require professional 
expertise and coordination. Organizations that face the challenge of successfully master-
ing DT need to either train existing staff or hire qualified managers. The latter succeeds 

--- [PAGE 5] ---
Gilli et al.	
5
by focusing on proven or to be developed skills and traits, known to foster change pro-
cesses, rather than difficult to grasp aspects such as self-concept and social role. This is 
also explicitly reflected in job descriptions and job advertisements which mainly high-
light skills and traits which are required or beneficial for the successful completion of 
organizational tasks (Todd et al., 1995; Verboncu and Zeininger, 2015). For the purpose 
of this paper, skills and traits are therefore considered as the main building blocks of 
leadership competencies for DT.
Differentiation and organizing frameworks regarding leadership skills.  The scholarly litera-
ture on conceptualizing, analyzing, and discussing leadership competencies, that is, 
skills and traits, is both broad and highly specialized (see, e.g., Zaccaro et al., 2018 for a 
detailed review). One of the first conceptualizations of skills needed in organizations is 
the seminal work “Skills of an Effective Administrator” (Katz, 1955) that identified the 
necessary skills for successful job performance in managerial tasks. Katz (1955: 33) 
defines skill as “. . . an ability which can be developed, not necessarily inborn, and 
which is manifested in performance, not merely in potential.” He concludes that the ideal 
executive, that is, an executive able to cope efficiently with any problem in any organiza-
tion, needs to possess three skills, that is, technical, conceptual, and human, which can 
be trained and developed.
Subsequently, there have been multiple attempts to define and categorize skills needed 
for effective management and leadership (e.g., Boyatzis, 1982; Mintzberg, 1973; 
Peterson and An Fleet, 2004). Building on previous models and categories of leadership 
skills, more recently the leadership skills strataplex proposed by Mumford et al. (2007), 
offers a widely accepted framework which seems to be suitable for categorizing leader-
ship skills required for planning and implementing DT processes. This is all the more the 
case as Mumford et al. (2007) explicitly emphasize that the effectiveness of leadership 
skills depends on the characteristics and demands of the specific context: leadership 
skills needed and effective in one context (e.g., managing a crisis like the current pan-
demic) are less suitable or even ineffective in a different situation (e.g., building a long-
term growth strategy). They further conceptualize managerial and leadership skill 
requirements as being layered (strata) and segmented (plex) and categorize them in terms 
of four general categories: (1) cognitive, (2) interpersonal, (3) business, and (4) strategic 
skills. Table 1 provides an overview of the four categories and the respective skills 
according to Mumford et al. (2007), which will be applied as the organizing framework 
during the empirical analyses below.
Differentiation of leadership traits.  For decades, leadership research has focused on iden-
tifying traits that distinguish leaders from followers. In contrast to skills, which can be 
learned and developed, traits are described as attributes people have and which cannot be 
learned—at least not in the short-term—and are difficult to change. Traits are commonly 
defined as “. . . relatively stable and coherent integrations of personal characteristics 
that foster a consistent pattern of leadership performance across a variety of group and 
organizational situations” (Zaccaro et al., 2004: 104). Neither the seminal review of 
leader trait research by Stogdill (1948) nor subsequent attempts were able to find a uni-
versal set of traits that consistently differentiates effective from less effective leaders. It 

--- [PAGE 6] ---
6	
German Journal of Human Resource Management 00(0)
has become evident that certain personality traits alone do not guarantee leadership suc-
cess. Early research in this regard points out that leadership traits are only a necessary but 
not sufficient precondition for leadership success (Lord et al., 1986). It has been further 
argued and shown that people who possess certain leadership traits need to make use of 
them by acting accordingly (e.g., formulating a vision, role modeling, setting goals) to be 
successful (Kirkpatick and Locke, 1991).
Irrespective of whether traits need to be combined with skills to be effective for 
achieving certain objectives, they are an important stream of leadership research and the 
basis of several leadership theories (Conger and Kanungo, 1987; House, 1977; Sashkin, 
1989; Yukl, 2013). Although researchers from different disciplines have studied the 
impact of leader traits on leadership success and have proposed context-specific trait 
concepts (Goldberg, 1990; Judge et al., 2002; Kirkpatick and Locke, 1991), determining 
unique leader traits seems to be of special interest for practitioners (e.g., Cantero-Gomez, 
2019). Additionally, the change management literature which is directly related to DT 
processes emphasizes the relevance of certain leader traits for the success of change 
initiatives (e.g., Longshore, 1987). For these reasons it is proposed to include leader 
traits in the analysis of leadership competencies for DT. However, due to the lack of 
specific frameworks regarding appropriate or required leader traits for strategic change 
processes an exploratory approach regarding the search of traits that are important in the 
context of DT is adopted.
Methodology
The current stage of DT, which poses a great challenge for private and public organiza-
tions as well as the dynamic demand for the development of new skills and traits as, for 
instance, reflected in the 21st century skills concept, calls for an exploratory research 
approach.
Table 1.  The four leadership skill categories according to Mumford et al. (2007).
Cognitive skills
Interpersonal skills
Business skills
Strategic skills
Communication skills
Social perceptiveness
Operations analysis
Visioning
Listening
Coordination
Mgmt. of personnel 
resources
Systems perception
Ability to learn and 
adapt
Negotiation
Mgmt. of financial 
resources
Systems evaluation
Active learning
Establishing 
relationships
Mgmt. of material 
resources
Identification 
of downstream 
consequences
Critical thinking
Persuasion skills
Identification of 
key causes
 
Problem 
identification 
Solution appraisal

--- [PAGE 7] ---
Gilli et al.	
7
Analyzing relevant job advertisements to identify and classify competencies related 
to leaders hired for managing digital change in organizations allows, among others, to fill 
the research gap of comparing leadership competencies developed and proposed by 
scholars with those competencies sought by practitioners. It is a well-established 
approach applied to investigate skills and traits related to certain organizational and man-
agerial tasks (e.g., Brooks et al., 2018; Cvetić et al., 2017; Debuse and Lawley, 2009; 
Den Hartog et al., 2007; Harris et al., 2012; Todd et al., 1995). Countering criticism that 
organizations may be careless and/or inexperienced regarding formulating and advertis-
ing clear job opportunities, Todd et al. (1995: 24) found that organizations are “. . . care-
ful to describe skills they actually require.” The analysis of job advertisements as a form 
of secondary data also provides certain advantages especially compared to survey-based 
approaches. Job advertisements need to be as precise as possible so that they mitigate 
adverse selection problems, are comparatively unbiased, and can be analyzed over time 
using established content analysis methods (Todd et al., 1995). Although one cannot rule 
out other biases such as imitation behavior of HR managers who copy job advertise-
ments from various sources or pre-determination through incorporating ideas derived 
from conceptualizations, a sufficiently large sample can nevertheless provide a robust 
understanding of competencies that are regarded as relevant by practitioners (Brooks 
et al., 2018).
Data collection and sampling
Prior to collecting data on job postings, personal interviews with experts and manage-
ment consultants have been conducted, which revealed that job advertisements in the 
field of DT management are mainly published on relevant international job portals such 
as Monster and Vault, and/or on the management consultants’ own career pages. Since 
one of the leading top management consulting firms, McKinsey & Company, is particu-
larly active in the field of advising clients in DT, Digital McKinsey has been included as 
a source for job opportunities. Hence, we searched for, selected, and analyzed relevant 
job postings advertised on Monster, Vault (collaborating with Indeed), and Digital 
McKinsey from August to September 2018.3 The search words applied regarding job 
titles included DT manager, business transformation manager, chief digital officer 
(CDO), digital strategy consultant, and digital project manager.
In the case of Monster and Vault, we used the default settings provided on the site, 
applying “digital” as the main search term. To filter out job offerings that focus on DT 
management rather than, for example, product development or network administration, 
we combined “digital” with the search terms “strategy,” “transformation,” “consultant,” 
or “project manager.” The Python software was used to automatically download the con-
tent of job advertisements which matched these search terms for further analysis.
The initial sample consisted of 492 job advertisements. Based on a manual review of 
the job titles and descriptions by the corresponding author, several job advertisements 
which, on closer analysis, had nothing to do with DT management were excluded. 
Software developer, web publisher and domain expert software developer are examples 
of jobs that were removed from the list. Next, job advertisements were excluded that (a) 

--- [PAGE 8] ---
8	
German Journal of Human Resource Management 00(0)
were related to very specific and narrow digital activities, (b) did not imply activities 
primarily related to DT, and (c) were related to trainee positions, all of which by defini-
tion do not contain leadership responsibilities. This concerned, for example, job offers 
such as digital account representative, digital solutions architect, data science consultant, 
and digital analytics analyst.
As a result of this in-depth assessment of initially selected job offerings we were left 
with a final sample of 239 advertisements. Of these 239 advertisements, 24 were from 
firms located in Europe, 213 in North America, and 2 in Australia. Regarding previous 
professional experience our sample contains 96 advertisements related to senior posi-
tions (explicitly calling for more than 5 years of professional experience) and 44 to junior 
positions (no experience at all or experience up to 5 years required). The remaining 99 
job advertisements asked for experience without any further temporal specification and, 
therefore, could not be assigned. In terms of recruiting employers, our sample includes 
only private-sector companies of various sizes from a range of sectors, with consulting 
firms representing by far the largest share (62%).
Data analysis
To analyze the data, a content analysis searching for leadership competencies in terms 
of skills and traits required (Elo and Kyngäs, 2008; Park et al., 2009) has been con-
ducted. We inductively identified the requirements emerging from the job advertise-
ments and coded the occurring skills and traits using the MAX QDA software. We 
applied the Gioia method (Gioia et al., 2013), as it allows a reduction of many codes 
into fewer categories. By means of a first order analysis, the content of 239 job adver-
tisements was coded descriptively, summarizing the relevant text passages and explicit 
skills, competencies, and traits into short, descriptive words. Out of 2781 coded seg-
ments, we generated 144 first-order concepts which formed the basis for further coding 
and analysis. Following the suggestion of Gioia et al. (1994), we subsequently applied 
a second-order analysis to categorize the data at a higher level of theoretical abstraction 
and to create second-order themes that embrace the first-order concepts (Glaser and 
Strauss, 1967; Strauss, 1987). For instance, first-order terms such as project manage-
ment and project budgeting were assigned to the second-order theme project manage-
ment. Similarly, the first-order terms data analytics, working with data, collecting, and 
analyzing data, synthesizing data, and exploring data sources, have been subsumed 
under the second-order theme big data analysis. After checking for category nesting 
and overlap, 47 second-order themes emerged.
Most of the job advertisements are structured similarly and comprise qualifications, 
experience, knowledge, and other job requirements. Consistent with the conceptual 
approach, we eliminated knowledge, because knowledge overlaps with other job require-
ments mentioned elsewhere in the job advertisements. Like Klus and Müller (2020), we 
used four dimensions—qualification, experience, skills, and traits—to assign the 47 
second-order themes. To reduce complexity and eliminate outliers we decided to remove 
specific job requirements mentioned less than 10 times leaving us with a final total of 29 
second-order themes.

--- [PAGE 9] ---
Gilli et al.	
9
First-order concepts
Second-order themes
Aggregate / Overarching 
dimensions
Qualification
Computer science, business, engineering, 
information systems, physics, mathematics, 
degree required but not specified
Academic Degree (84)
Second degree, Phd, MBA
Undergraduate degree, Bachelor, Bs
Graduate degree, Master, Msc
Bachelor (86)
Master (20)
Second Degree (12)
Consulng, consultancy, advisory
Industry-specific, subject-specific
Coaching, training
Consulting (97)
Industry- or subject-specific 
(60)
Coaching & Training (11)
Experience
Project management, budgeting projects, 
financial planning
Project Management (121)
Data analytics, working with data, collecting 
synthesizing, and analyzing data, digital 
analytics
Big Data Analytics (94)
Traits
Driven, self-starter, pro-activeness, 
Pro-activeness (54)
Creativity, think(ing) outside the box
Willingness to travel (40)
Strategic Thinking(185)
Customer Orientation (152)
Collaboration (199)
Leadership Skills (165)
Skills
Strategy: planning definition, 
implementation, strategic thinking, digital 
strategy 
Customer orientation, client engagement, 
customer interaction, service orientation
Collaborative working, team orientation, 
team player
Leading, team leading, leading cross-
functional teams, leader, influencing people
Creativity (18)
Willingness to travel
Communication
Communication Skills (137)
Figure 1.  Data structuring illustrated by a selection of second-order themes. Numbers in 
parentheses refer to the number of job advertisements in which the specific skill requirement 
was mentioned.
Results
The organization of the data from first-order themes to aggregated skill and trait dimen-
sions is illustrated in Figure 1—using a selection of second-order themes.4

--- [PAGE 10] ---
10	
German Journal of Human Resource Management 00(0)
Taxonomy development
To develop a taxonomy of leadership skills and traits needed for managing DT success-
fully, we applied an abductive approach, as suggested by Kalargyrou et al. (2012) and 
further analyzed the two inductively identified dimensions, that is, skills and traits.
Accordingly, each job requirement related to leadership skills which derived from the 
content analysis was subsequently assigned to one of the four leadership skill categories 
cognitive skills, interpersonal skills, business skills, and strategic skills (Mumford et al., 
2007). First, we assigned communication skills, problem solving, analytical, and presen-
tation skills, as well as multi-tasking, time management, adaptability, the ability to 
explain complex issues in a simple manner, and listening, to the category of cognitive 
skills. Second, collaboration, leadership skills, and relationship management were 
assigned to interpersonal skills. Third, project management, technological expertise, big 
data analysis, coding, and programing, agile and scrum, diverse technological skills such 
as MS Office and Cloud, business-savviness, e-commerce, and design thinking were 
assigned to the category of business skills. Finally, strategic skills embrace strategic 
thinking, customer orientation, change management, business development, and innova-
tion attitude. Table 2 provides an overview of the taxonomy development for the selected 
leadership skills derived from the job postings. The number in parentheses in the column 
of second-order themes indicates the frequency this leadership skill was mentioned in the 
job requirements in the sample.5
As previously explained, leadership traits mentioned in job postings for DT leaders 
are more difficult to cluster and assign due to the lack of a suitable organizing frame-
work. Thus, only a categorization of first-order concepts derived from the content analy-
sis to second-order themes was conducted, which were then subsumed under the single 
dimension “trait” (Kalargyrou et al., 2012). The four second-order themes proposed are 
pro-activeness, willingness to travel, creativity, and passion (Table 3).
Descriptive results
Not surprisingly, the analyzed job postings contained a much greater variety of leader-
ship skills than leadership traits—26 second-order skill themes compared to four second-
order trait themes. However, we believe it is surprising that personality traits are 
mentioned at all in job advertisements relating to DT. It is further noteworthy that pro-
activeness is mentioned relatively frequently, which indicates that the change process 
related to the DT of companies differs from the more reactive process of implementing 
new legal regulations, for example.
Our study reveals that organizations seeking managers for their DT efforts consider 
general managerial and leadership skills more important than specific technological 
skills directly related to digitalization. However, the field of digitalization contains vari-
ous technologies such as big data analytics, web development, and programing, which is 
reflected by the high number of mentions (more than 280) in job postings regarding DT. 
On the other hand, it is notable that key words and terms which are commonly closely 
related to DT such as Industry 4.0, Internet of things, artificial intelligence, blockchain, 
or augmented reality did not show up at all.

--- [PAGE 11] ---
Gilli et al.	
11
Table 2.  Overview of leadership skill requirements categorized according to Mumford et al. 
(2007).
First-order concepts
Second-order themes
Overarching 
dimensions
Communication skills
Communication skills (137)
Cognitive skills
Problem solving
Problem solving (85)
Analytical skills
Analytical skills (52)
Presentation skills
Presentation skills (48)
Multi tasking
Multi-tasking (39)
Time management
Time management (37)
Flexibility/Adaptability
Adaptability (13)
Explain complex issues simply/in 
a simple manner
Explain complex issues in a 
simple manner (11)
Active listening, listening
Listening (10)
Collaborative working
Collaboration (199)
Interpersonal skills
Team orientation/team player
Leadership
Team leadership (165)
Team leading (e.g. leading cross-
functional teams)
Influencing people
 
External collaboration/
Stakeholder management
Relationship management (101)
 
Project management
Project management (121)
Business skills
Budgeting projects/Financial 
planning
Technological expertise
Technological expertise (103)
Understanding of emerging 
technologies
Passion for technology
Application of technology
Data analytics / Digital analytics
Big Data analysis (117)
Working with (digital) data
To collect and analyze data
Synthesizing data
Exploring data sources
Web development (CSS, Java, 
HTML)
Coding & Programing (61)
DevOps
Programing
Digital architecture
Scrum (Product owner)
Agile & Scrum (56)
Agile methodologies
Agile environment
Agile development
 (Continued)

--- [PAGE 12] ---
12	
German Journal of Human Resource Management 00(0)
Table 3.  Overview of leadership trait requirements.
First-order concepts
Second-order themes
Overarching dimension
Driven
Pro-activeness (54)
Trait
Self-starter
Pro-active
Experimental
Willingness to travel
Willingness to travel (40)
Creative
Creativity (18)
Think outside the box
Passion
Passion (14)
Interest
Enthusiasm
Motivation
Numbers in parentheses refer to the number of job advertisements in which the specific trait requirement 
was mentioned.
First-order concepts
Second-order themes
Overarching 
dimensions
MS Office
Specific technological skills (88)
Cloud
CRM/CMS
Understanding the business
Business-savvyness (27)
E-Commerce platforms
E-Commerce (14)
Design thinking
Design thinking (11)
 
 
Strategy
Strategic thinking (185)
Strategic skills
Strategy: planning, definition, 
implementation
Visioning
Digital strategy
Customer orientation/client 
engagement
Customer orientation (152)
Customer interaction
Service orientation
Change management 
(transformational change)
Change management (95)
Digital transformation
Business development
Business development (45)
Innovation, innovative thinking
Innovation attitude (22)
Numbers in parentheses refer to the number of job advertisements in which the specific skill requirement 
was mentioned.
Table 2.  (Continued)

--- [PAGE 13] ---
Gilli et al.	
13
At the next level of analysis, the most important leadership competencies for DT pro-
cesses were taken in consideration, revealing additional results of interest (Table 4).
Although one might expect that visionary leadership, foresight, and inspiration would 
be mentioned most, the five most frequently requested competencies for managing DT 
within organizations based on our second-order clustering are: collaboration, strategic 
thinking, team leadership, customer orientation, and communication skills. It should be 
noted, however, that aligning job requirements mentioned in the job offers to second-
order themes leaves room for interpretation due to the lack of clear assignment criteria. 
For example, if the ability for efficient time management (n = 37) is a separate second-
order theme but assigned to project management skills (n = 121), the latter category 
would make it to the five most frequently mentioned characteristics.
In the following paragraphs we will highlight several notable insights related to the 
overview provided by Table 2. Although all skill categories of the Mumford et al. (2007) 
framework—cognitive skills (n = 432), interpersonal skills (n = 465), business skills 
(n = 598), and strategic skills (n = 499)—show a fairly even distribution, specialist exper-
tise and understanding of the business and related digital technologies appear to be of 
particular importance for mastering DT.
Regarding the professional requirements subsumed under business skills, the afore-
mentioned set of information technology expertise in various fields with a clear focus on 
applications (e.g., “understanding of emerging technologies”) stands out. The compara-
tively high number of job postings that explicitly seek candidates with knowledge about 
scrum and agile organization (n = 56) may indicate the need for implementing digital 
solutions that increase an organization’s flexibility. In addition, job postings frequently 
highlight that successful applicants should have project management experience and 
skills. This may suggest that a large proportion of the advertised positions are looking for 
a change agent, rather than the creator of digital business solutions.
However, many companies do not appear to be seeking an operative project manager. 
Rather they are seeking a manager of DT who can comprehend the strategic dimensions 
critical to an organization’s successful DT. Many job postings emphasize the need for 
strategic, long-term, and performance-oriented thinking (n = 185), making these strate-
gic skills the number two skill category. Such a strategic orientation is also supported by 
the frequent mention of the need for customer orientation in DT (n = 152). Taking this 
perspective, DT is not an end in itself but intends to strengthen the strategic positioning 
vis-à-vis customers. Furthermore, the job advertisements examined explicitly refer to the 
change management process associated with DT (n = 95).
Table 4.  Top five leadership competencies needed for digital transformation.
No.
Leadership competencies
Frequency
1
Collaboration
(199)
2
Strategic thinking
(185)
3
Team leadership skills
(165)
4
Customer orientation
(152)
5
Communication skills
(137)

--- [PAGE 14] ---
14	
German Journal of Human Resource Management 00(0)
This is mirrored in the high number of interpersonal skills which are mentioned in 
the job postings analyzed. DT means a fundamental change in the organization that does 
not stop at any functional or organizational boundary and, therefore, involves many 
internal and external stakeholders with whom the manager must work cooperatively. 
The need to work in a collaborative way across different boundaries and as a respected 
team player is explicitly mentioned in more than 83% of all analyzed job postings 
(n = 199). However, being “only” a team player is not sufficient to successfully manag-
ing digital transformation. Additionally, many firms seek candidates that are able to 
provide direction and motivation to the change teams (n = 165), making team leadership 
skills the third most mentioned skill dimension. This is of special interest as most DT 
teams will be cross-functional.
Finally, a leader of DT initiatives needs distinct cognitive skills to be successful. 
Related to the strong customer orientation and collaborative teamwork, it does not come 
as a surprise that communication skills are explicitly mentioned as a necessary skill set 
in more than 57% of all job postings (n = 137). If requirements such as presentation 
skills, listening skills, and the ability to explain complex issues in a simple way are 
grouped together as communication skills, more than four-fifths of all job advertisements 
contain these skills (n = 206).
The prevalence of pro-activeness (n = 54) suggests that many companies are not just 
aiming at responding to new technology developments but are seeking employees who 
can identify new business opportunities and subsequently implement them, as well as 
improve internal business operations. Like many empirical studies, it is important to 
examine both recurring and infrequent mentions to draw meaningful conclusions. Hence, 
notably, relatively few job descriptions include creativity (n = 18; 7.5%) or passion 
(n = 14; 5.9%).
Comparison with previous studies
The role of qualifications and prior experience for leadership 
competencies
Although this study focuses on leadership competencies consisting of a specific skill 
set and supportive personality traits for managing DT, the job postings examined pro-
vided information about qualifications and prior experiences requested for the job (see 
Figure 1). Our results reveal that while an academic degree, signaling at least a basic 
knowledge and basic analytical skills, is mentioned as a requirement in almost all cases 
analyzed (84.5%), a certain level of higher education is often not mandated. From the 
point of view of managing DT processes, it might have been expected that manage-
ment-relevant degree programs are preferred, however, results show that no specific 
discipline dominates DT-related job postings. This suggests that HR practitioners are 
doubtful that leadership skills on current issues (e.g., digitalization, sustainability, 
energy transition) are developed in degrees and courses offered by higher education 
institutions. This finding is in line with findings from related research which highlights 
similar deficits and resulting challenges of providing employees with skills necessary 
in the 21st century (Hempsall, 2014; Uhl-Bien et al., 2007).

--- [PAGE 15] ---
Gilli et al.	
15
Highlighting the importance of the specific business context for successful DT initia-
tives, results show that executives and HR managers explicitly emphasize industry or 
consulting experience. Two-thirds of all job postings by consulting firms mentioned the 
need or preference for applicants to have prior consulting experience (97 out of 148), 
very similar to preference for industry—or subject-specific experience among the other 
industries (60 out of 91). Interestingly, while employers in this context seem to believe 
that prior industry experience is beneficial, prior research has shown that it bears hidden 
costs, too: “. . . in addition to helpful skills and knowledge, workers also carry rigidities 
that partially offset the benefits of prior related experience.” (Dokko et al., 2009: 63). 
However, this potential problem applies to most other job advertisements and is not spe-
cific to jobs in DT. A possible explanation is, that prior industry experience increases the 
chance that the selected change manager will focus on developing new business models 
and improving business processes through new digital technologies, rather than first hav-
ing to fundamentally understand the business. Moreover, seeking candidates with prior 
experience may be an indication that many organizations continue to struggle with DT 
and do not know how to handle this process effectively, ultimately leading to failure 
(Rogers, 2016; Tollman et al., 2017). To reduce the risk of failure, firms which face the 
need to further digitalization may prefer to hire external leaders who are already experi-
enced regarding leading DT processes—even if outside of their industry—rather than 
stick to industry experience.
Comparison with other approaches aiming at capturing leadership 
competencies
Similar to other management fields, there is an ongoing debate regarding whether aca-
demic teaching—and partially research—is lagging behind practical requirements, espe-
cially in the field of digital skills (Royle and Laing, 2014) versus whether practitioners 
do not precisely know what skills and training is required to successfully manage DT 
processes. Contributing to this debate, we compare our general findings with conceptual 
studies on leadership skills in the digital age.
Notably, studies originating from the field of information and computer sciences par-
ticularly emphasize knowledge in different technology fields of digitalization as leader-
ship skills. Skills related to the context of business applications, change management, 
and particularly those related to the participation and persuasion of different stakeholders 
are given lower priority or are not addressed at all. The “Skills for Digital Transformation” 
study is a prototypical example (Hoberg et al., 2015). It surveyed CIOs and other execu-
tives responsible for DT worldwide regarding the importance and availability of skills 
related to certain domains for successfully performing DT using predefined response 
categories. Actually, response categories were limited to Entrepreneurship (importance: 
65%—availability: 34%), Product/Service Integration (66%–36%), Business Networks 
(71%–42%), Business Change Management (84%–46%), and 10 technological domains 
such as Blockchain (36%–24%), Social Media (63%–57%), Internet of Things (75%–
32%), or Digital Security (88%–45%). While it is possible that some of these skills were 
implicitly categorized under Business Change Management, several important skills 

--- [PAGE 16] ---
16	
German Journal of Human Resource Management 00(0)
subsumed under strategic skills or interpersonal skills (e.g., team collaboration and team 
leadership) in the Mumford et al. (2007) framework are absent or wrongly assumed to be 
either not critical for DT or anyhow present in organizations.
How do our findings contrast with practice-based conceptualizations and proposals 
on leadership competencies for DT (e.g., Horlacher and Hess, 2016; Reck and Fliaster, 
2019; Rickards et al., 2015; Wade and Obwegeser, 2019), which often focus on chief 
digital officers (CDOs), chief information officers (CIOs), or chief technical officers 
(CTOs)? These studies often emphasize general needs such as collaborating with other 
executives, thinking strategically and being business-centered, pushing customer cen-
tricity, designing agile organizations, and having implementation skills. They frequently 
use aggregated and comparatively vague terminology, which does not appear suitable for 
establishing a clear requirement profile regarding leadership competencies. However, 
they provide an idea of how leadership skills and traits need to be directed toward organi-
zational goals and company performance.
Compared to results referred to in literature reviews of digital leadership and leader-
ship competencies for DT (Eberl and Drews, 2021; Guzmán et al., 2020; Klein, 2020; 
Vial, 2019), our findings provide another interesting insight. It becomes apparent that 
beyond generic success attributes of leaders (e.g., social intelligence, rewarding, agile, 
visionary), clearly defining skills and personality traits is necessary to allow operation-
alization and, consequently, analyses and an assessment regarding job applicants or posi-
tion holders.
Despite the fact that the term DT is deeply interwoven with technology (Canaday, 
2017; O’Neill, 2009; Sebastian et  al., 2017) and data (Chen et  al., 2017; Dhar and 
Sundararajan, 2007; Dremel et al., 2017), our results provide empirical evidence that 
general managerial and leadership skills are at least equally relevant as skills related to 
specific (digital) technologies. This confirms the assumption that DT needs to be under-
stood as a strategic change process (e.g., Schneider, 2018), requiring leaders to under-
stand the business and their teams, in addition to being digital experts (Furr et al., 2019). 
Moreover, the importance of traditional leadership and strategy competencies such as 
team leading, change management, and formulating and implementing a (digital) strat-
egy supports the assumption that change processes that constitute DT are not that differ-
ent from other organizational change interventions (e.g., reengineering, mergers and 
acquisitions), allowing to nurture from the established knowledge in the field of strategic 
change management (Bohnsack et al., 2018).
Finally, how do the results of our study reflect what has been conceptualized as 21st 
century skills? The concept of 21st century skills initially aims at changing the way stu-
dents at all ages are prepared in a better, more appropriate way for the future of work 
increasingly dominated by information and communication technologies, technical 
devices, and software programs (Dede, 2010; Levy and Murnane, 2004). On the one 
hand, 21st century skills also include megatrends and grand societal challenges such as 
globalization, inequality, or climate change, too (e.g., reflected for example in global 
awareness, civic literacy). On the other hand, 21st century skills do not strive to identify 
and systematize leadership competencies that ensure successful DT (Van Laar et al., 
2017). Hence, while there are certain overlaps in the requirements, for example, regard-
ing collaboration and communication skills, or comprehending information technology 

--- [PAGE 17] ---
Gilli et al.	
17
contexts (Dede, 2010), significant gaps, for example, with regard to team leadership, 
project management or strategic skills are obvious. In other words, not every student will 
be responsible for managing the DT of organizations. Leadership skills are just one cat-
egory among many others subsumed under life skills according to the Partnership for 
21st Century Skills (2008). However, it is known from the leadership literature that lead-
ership success, also in the digital age, depends on the qualifications of those being led 
(Dvir and Shamir, 2003; Yukl, 2013; Zhu et al., 2009): “Skills are important for effective 
performance of leading and following functions.” (Malakyan, 2014: 12). As such, the 
21st century skills initiative aiming at improving the way next generations are prepared 
for the digital challenges of the future, has an indirect impact on DT. The next generation 
will have less difficulties to comprehend the opportunities and threats of digitalization 
and one may expect less explanation effort and less resistance to change. However, such 
a proposition needs to be further investigated, as the Generation Z is entering the world 
of work who needs effective onboarding programs, and in view of inter-generational 
conflicts (e.g. Chillakuri, 2020; Scholz, 2014).
Comparison with another study investigating job advertisements
In comparison with the findings of Klus and Müller (2020), who applied a similar meth-
odological approach, our results show a number of interesting differences and common-
alities that might be worth to be further explored by future research initiatives.
To start with, regarding the most important skills and traits between different manage-
ment levels, Klus and Müller’s (2020) findings do not differ from those shown and 
described above. Despite some differences in the methodological design, sample and, 
hence, analyses most of Klus and Müller’s finding seem to also apply to our study. 
However, the high prevalence of interpersonal skills (e.g., collaboration, team leadership, 
stakeholder management) and strategic skills (e.g., strategic thinking, customer orienta-
tion, change management) which we found in our sample is not reflected in their study. 
These skills may be hidden in categories, such as subject specific experience, subject 
specific knowledge, and leadership experience, which are top ranked in their study.
Secondly, we find support for our findings regarding the inclusion of personality traits 
in job advertisements for DT leaders. Klus and Müller (2020) refer to increasingly dif-
ferentiated traits such as individual flexibility, commitment, or stress tolerance. In con-
trast, pro-activity, which is frequently addressed in our study, does not appear. We 
conclude that both studies support the claim that traits continue to be important to 
employers and may be experiencing a new era with digitalization (Beeks, 2012; Fitzgerald 
et al., 2013; Hoberg et al., 2015; Kane et al., 2019).
Finally, while both studies proved how important communication and presentation 
skills are to practitioners and HR managers, for example, they differ in certain respects. 
In Klus and Müller’s (2020) German sample, for example, intercultural competence and 
the leader’s self-motivation are attributed a significant role. In our international sample, 
the ability to lead cross-functional teams is highlighted, and we only found a marginal 
reference to self-motivation of the leader. This difference could therefore be the result of 
cultural context or, more broadly, by the institutional context in which the companies 
operate (Peng et al., 2009).

--- [PAGE 18] ---
18	
German Journal of Human Resource Management 00(0)
Discussion and conclusions
The objective of this study is to identify and to categorize leadership competencies which 
are considered by practitioners as necessary to successfully mastering DT. For this rea-
son, requirements outlined in 239 job advertisements of international firms involved in 
DT processes have been analyzed.
We found that a great variety of leadership skills and traits are expected to ensure suc-
cessful DT in addition to technical skills and specific knowledge regarding hard- und 
software specifications. The strong emphasis on communication skills, cross-functional 
collaboration in teams, strategic thinking, and customer orientation bears a strong resem-
blance to other strategic change processes. It seems to reflect the fact that digitalization 
and an advanced comprehension of digital transformation concepts concerns a process of 
change that has been ongoing for decades, even if it has recently become more dynamic 
and extensive. Digital leaders as they are frequently labeled are expected to orchestrate a 
team of technology experts (e.g., regarding Internet of things, artificial intelligence), busi-
ness experts and entrepreneurs, and HRM experts (e.g., overcoming resistance, employee 
participation). In this regard, our research is in line with other authors claiming that peo-
ple, not technology, drive DT and that organizations require leaders and not necessarily 
technological specialists for managing the complex changes that comprise an organiza-
tion’s DT (Furr et al., 2019; Vasconcelos et al., 2016; Vial, 2019; Voigt et al., 2014).
Theoretical contributions and practical implications
Considering its conceptualizations and empirical results, our study offers an important 
contribution for a better and more complete comprehension of leadership competencies, 
that is, skills and traits, that have an impact on the success of DT processes.
First, by complementing the comparatively underdeveloped empirical coverage of 
actual job requirements, we contribute to a holistic approach to the evaluation of such 
competencies. Our findings can be used for comparisons with results derived from dif-
ferent sources, samples and methods applied. Furthermore, they provide a reference 
point for conceptual studies to compare certain job skills and personality requirements.
Secondly, by applying and transferring the leadership skills strataplex proposed by 
Mumford et al. (2007) to a contemporary and novel context, we were able to highlight 
opportunities and limitations of using it as an alternative organizing framework.
Our study also yields important practical implications. First, it offers a systematic 
overview of skills and traits discussed in the scholarly literature as well as of those 
sought by organizations facing DT. A systematic overview of the latter skills and traits 
was not publicly available and can be used to check and complement job descriptions 
and advertisements currently used. Secondly, it may help to mitigate assumptions that 
successful DT processes are only possible through hiring technological experts, as it 
highlights the importance of a collaborative and strategic approach, strong leadership, a 
high level of customer orientation, and excellent communication skills. Thirdly, our 
study may be used by practitioners to increase their awareness of the virtue of utilizing 
conceptual frameworks which may surface skills and traits currently neglected when 
drafting job descriptions and job calls.

--- [PAGE 19] ---
Gilli et al.	
19
Limitations and future research ideas
Given the complexity and variety of skills and traits listed in job advertisements, as well 
as the numerous research streams providing in-depth analyses and findings, this study 
has certain limitations beyond what has been previously discussed.
On the conceptual side, selecting one organizing framework over another will impact 
the results and their interpretation as the comparison with Klus and Müller (2020) has 
revealed. As long as there is no generally accepted systematization approach for task-
relevant skills and traits specifically for managers of organizational change which 
accounts for general leadership competencies on the one hand, and for context-specific, 
partially unknown or neglected skills (keyword: 21st century skills), the use of alterna-
tive approaches is necessary. This offers a variety of opportunities for future research in 
this important field.
A further limitation, although inherent to empirical studies, refers to the selection of 
the sample and databases used. Excluding other recruiting websites (e.g., The Ladders—
for experienced managers or Scouted—for recent college graduates) and channels 
besides Vault (Indeed) and Monster and other—particularly specialized consulting firms 
(e.g., Gartner), leading accounting firms (e.g., Deloitte), and software firms specializing 
in DT (e.g., Oracle/PeopleSoft)—besides McKinsey Digital may impact the generaliza-
bility of our results. Since complete coverage cannot be achieved in any case, this limita-
tion results in the call for comparable studies of job vacancies to examine and supplement 
the existing results. Our study is, so to speak, a first robust push in this direction. The 
same applies to broadening the geographical (e.g., EU, Asia) and temporal sample as to 
allow for cross-national, cross-cultural comparisons or to analyze developments and 
changes over time.
As in other studies, limitations may also apply to the method and analysis. In addition 
to the advantages mentioned at the beginning, certain disadvantages of an analysis of job 
advertisements related to its reliability and validity must also be considered (e.g., Harper, 
2012). It may be argued that a significant number of jobs might not be advertised exter-
nally but are filled internally (Croneis and Henderson, 2002). This is certainly true, but 
it can be assumed that in this case, too, requirement criteria based on a DT manager’s job 
descriptions are used and that in a well-managed company with functioning HR pro-
cesses, these will differ only insignificantly from those used for external tenders. 
Furthermore, as we have already mentioned above job postings depend on the ability of 
HR managers and recruiters to identify and translate requirements of the actual position 
into explicit skills and traits (Ahmed, 2005) and may additionally suffer from imitation 
behavior. The application of complementary empirical methods may be appropriate. For 
example, future research could analyze how companies, their HR departments, or HR 
consultancies have derived the required qualifications in the context of DT.
Finally, limitations with respect to the validity and generalizability of our results 
could result from the coding and categorization of the skills and personality traits. 
Caused by a lack of objective criteria, this process needs subjective interpretation as 
demonstrated among others through the comparison with the study of Klus and Müller 
(2020). This inherent coding and categorization issue applies even more when using 
content analysis software packages, as the ease to use hides the “carbage in – carbage 

--- [PAGE 20] ---
20	
German Journal of Human Resource Management 00(0)
out” problem. Particularly, if terminological nuances remain unrecognized and scholars 
predominantly rely more on quantitative counts. For instance, using too narrow or 
ambiguous search criteria may unconsciously exclude relevant job advertisements and 
preselection of search terms by individual researchers may lead to false negatives and 
false positives. Additionally, general models and organizing frameworks are limited and 
unable to account for the peculiarities of rather specific and novel tasks and job require-
ments as in the case of leading and managing DT processes. Because we believe the 
fundamental problem cannot be solved, a more pronounced focus on this step of the 
analysis is needed. Collaboration among different researchers and practitioners, includ-
ing independent categorization that is subsequently reconciled and extensively dis-
cussed, could lead to increased validity of the results.
This contribution should be seen as a supplement to other studies and practical experi-
ence. With other words, our study does not claim that practitioners are better able to 
identify and to conceptualize skills and traits necessary for leading a successful DT nor 
does it reflect reality in an all-encompassing way rather than providing a solid basis for 
comparisons and future alignments.
Future research may take a closer look at contextual aspects based on extended sam-
ple sizes, databases, and methodological approaches. It might be of special interest to 
analyze whether large companies are seeking different leadership competencies for their 
DT processes than small and medium-sized enterprises. Another interesting future 
research stream may compare leadership competencies sought by private versus those of 
public administration organizations. Furthermore, as we know from international man-
agement and especially HRM research, there may be systematic differences in the under-
standing of leadership and change processes between different countries.
Regarding methods, future research may employ triangulation. As already mentioned, 
qualitative interviews with HRM and DT experts may be used to identify disregarded or 
underrated skills and traits which may be taken for granted when searching for a DT 
leader and, hence, are not explicitly mentioned. Future studies could also methodically 
identify leadership competencies relevant to success by observing or interviewing impor-
tant stakeholders of actual DT processes such as project leaders, team members, affected 
employees, top and middle managers, and employee representatives. Future research in 
the field of organizational change processes induced by digitalization may analyze even 
more comprehensively the impact of conceptual factors on the success of change pro-
cesses as outlined in the respective literature. Such factors include the influence of exter-
nal pressure to reorganize, the extent of internal power games and conflicts, or barriers 
such as vested interests of middle managers on the selection of the most suitable DT 
leader or the set of competencies and traits which match certain situations (e.g., Doppler 
and Lauterburg, 2019; Miller and Dess, 1996; Nippa, 1997).
Funding
The author(s) received no financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this 
article.
ORCID iD
Katharina Gilli 
 https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5366-3081

--- [PAGE 21] ---
Gilli et al.	
21
Notes
1.	
While the scholarly literature like Kotter (1990) or Bennis (2009), for good reasons, calls for 
distinguishing between management and leadership, this article uses the terms interchange-
ably. In terms of digital transformation, leaders seem to act as change managers by both driv-
ing and implementing the strategic change in an organizational context.
2.	
Similar skill concepts, which are more related to digital technology but consider the leader-
ship aspect less, are the concepts of Digital Skills (Van Dijk, 2005), Digital Fluency (Briggs 
and Makice, 2012), and Digital Literacy (Gilster, 1997).
3.	
Monster (monster.com), Vault (vault.com), Indeed (indeed.com), Digital McKinsey (www.
mckinsey.com/business-functions/mckinsey-digital/careers).
4.	
Table 2 provides a complete list of second-order themes.
5.	
As already mentioned above, requirements with less than 10 mentions in the 239 cases exam-
ined have been removed.
References
Ahmed S (2005) Desired competencies and job duties of non-profit CEOs in relation to the current 
challenges. The Journal of Management Development 24(10): 913–928.
Bawany S (2020) Ensuring leadership readiness for a digital centric future workplace in the ‘new 
normal’. Available at: https://www.hr.com/en/magazines/leadership_excellence_essentials/
november_2020_leadership/developing-%E2%80%98disruptive-digital-leaders%E2%80%99-
for-the-po_kh3glduc.html (accessed 5 April 2022).
Beeks J (2012) A review of “Community Leadership 4.0: Impacting a world gone wiki”. World 
Futures 68(6): 456–459.
Bekkhus R (2016) Do KPIs used by CIOs decelerate digital business transformation? The Case 
of ITIL. In: Digital innovation, technology, and strategy conference, Dublin, Ireland, 
11–14 December. https://aisel.aisnet.org/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1014&context=di
git2016 (accessed 5 April 2022).
Bennis WG (2009) On Becoming a Leader. (20th anniversary ed., rev. and updated). New York, 
NY: Basic Books.
Berman SJ (2012) Digital transformation: Opportunities to create new business models. Strategy 
and Leadership 40(2): 16–24.
Bohnsack R, Hanelt A, Marz D, et al. (2018) Same, same, but different!? A systematic review 
of the literature on digital transformation. Academy of Management Proceedings 2018(1): 
16262.
Bondarouk TV and Ruël HJM (2008) HRM systems for successful information technology imple-
mentation: Evidence from three case studies. European Management Journal 26(3): 153–165.
Boyatzis RE (1982) The Competent Manager: A Model for Effective Performance. A Wiley-
Interscience publication. New York, NY: Wiley.
Briggs C and Makice K (2012) Digital Fluency: Building Success in the Digital Age. Bloomington, 
IN: SociaLens.
Brooks NG, Greer TH and Morris SA (2018) Information systems security job advertisement 
analysis: Skills review and implications for information systems curriculum. Journal of 
Education for Business 93(5): 213–221.
Burke WW (2008) Organization Change: Theory & Practice. London: SAGE.
Canaday T (2017) Evolving a payments business to meet the demands of a distributed economy. 
Journal of Payments Strategy & Systems 11(1): 15–22.
Cantero-Gomez P (2019) The 4 common traits shared by successful leaders. Available at: https://
www.forbes.com/sites/palomacanterogomez/2019/05/28/the-4-common-traces-shared-by-
all-successful-leaders/#38d6e1c01536 (accessed 5 April 2022).

--- [PAGE 22] ---
22	
German Journal of Human Resource Management 00(0)
Chen H, Schütz R, Kazman R, et al. (2017) How Lufthansa capitalized on big data for business 
model renovation. MIS Quarterly Executive 16(1): 19–34.
Chillakuri B (2020) Understanding Generation Z expectations for effective onboarding. Journal of 
Organizational Change Management 33(7): 1277–1296.
Conger JA and Kanungo RN (1987) Toward a behavioral theory of charismatic leadership in 
organizational settings. Academy of Management Review 12(4): 637–647.
Croneis KS and Henderson P (2002) Electronic and digital librarian positions: A content analysis 
of announcements from 1990 through 2000. The Journal of Academic Librarianship 28(4): 
232–237.
Cvetić B, Vasiljević D and Danilović M (2017) Competence requirements for logistics managers 
in the Republic of Serbia. Journal of Sustainable Business and Management Solutions in 
Emerging Economies 22(2): 37–46.
Day DV, Fleenor JW, Atwater LE, et al. (2014) Advances in leader and leadership development: A 
review of 25years of research and theory. The Leadership Quarterly 25(1): 63–82.
Debuse J and Lawley MA (2009) Desirable ICT graduate attributes: Theory versus practice. 
Journal of Information Systems Education 20(3): 313–323.
Dede C (2010) Comparing frameworks for 21st century skills. In: Bellanca JA and Brandt RS (eds) 
Leading edge: 21st century skills: Rethinking how students learn, vol. 5. Bloomington, IN: 
Solution Tree Press, pp.51–76.
Deloitte (2017) What key competencies are needed in the digital age? Available at: https://www2.
deloitte.com/ch/en/pages/innovation/articles/competencies-in-the-digital-age.html (accessed 
5 April 2022).
Den Hartog DN, Caley A and Dewe P (2007) Recruiting leaders: An analysis of leadership adver-
tisements. Human Resource Management Journal 17(1): 58–75.
Dhar V and Sundararajan A (2007) Issues and Opinions—Information Technologies in business: 
A blueprint for education and research. Information Systems Research 18(2): 125–141. http://
www.jstor.org/stable/23015398
Dokko G, Wilk SL and Rothbard NP (2009) Unpacking prior experience: How career history 
affects job performance. Organization Science 20(1): 51–68.
Doppler K and Lauterburg C (2019) Change Management: Den Unternehmenswandel gestalten, 
14th edn. Frankfurt/Main: Campus Verlag.
Dremel C, Wulf J, Herterich M, et al. (2017) How AUDI AG established big data analytics in its 
digital transformation. MIS Quarterly Executive 16(2): 3.
Dvir T and Shamir B (2003) Follower developmental characteristics as predicting transformational 
leadership: A longitudinal field study. The Leadership Quarterly 14(3): 327–344.
Eberl J and Drews P (2021) Digital Leadership ‒ Mountain or molehill? A literature review. 
Available at: https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Paul-Drews/publication/348200766_Digital_
Leadership_-_Mountain_or_Molehill_A_Literature_Review/links/5ff38822299bf140887003d9/
Digital-Leadership-Mountain-or-Molehill-A-Literature-Review.pdf (accessed 5 April 2022).
Elo S and Kyngäs H (2008) The qualitative content analysis process. Journal of Advanced Nursing 
62(1): 107–115.
Fitzgerald M, Kruschwitz N, Bonnet D, et al. (2013) Embracing digital technology. A new strate-
gic imperative. MIT Sloan Management Review 55(2): 1–12.
Furr N, Gaarlandt J and Shipilov A (2019) Don’t put a digital expert in charge of your digital 
transformation. Harvard Business Review. Available at: https://hbr.org/2019/08/dont-put-a-
digital-expert-in-charge-of-your-digital-transformation (accessed 5 April 2022).
Gilster P (1997) Digital Literacy. New York, NY: Wiley.
Gioia DA, Corley KG and Hamilton AL (2013) Seeking qualitative rigor in inductive research. 
Organizational Research Methods 16(1): 15–31.

--- [PAGE 23] ---
Gilli et al.	
23
Gioia DA, Thomas JB, Clark SM, et al. (1994) Symbolism and strategic change in academia: The 
dynamics of sensemaking and influence. Organization Science 5(3): 363–383.
Glaser BG and Strauss AL (1967) The Discovery of Grounded Theory: Strategies for Qualitative 
Research. Chicago, IL: Aldine.
Goldberg LR (1990) An alternative “description of personality”: The Big-Five factor structure. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 59(6): 1216–1229.
Guzmán VE, Muschard B, Gerolamo M, et al. (2020) Characteristics and skills of leadership in the 
context of Industry 4.0. Procedia Manufacturing 43: 543–550.
Hackman JR and Lawler EE (1971) Employee reactions to job characteristics. Journal of Applied 
Psychology 55(3): 259–286.
Hackman JR and Oldham GR (1976) Motivation through the design of work: Test of a theory. 
Organizational Behavior and Human Performance 16(2): 250–279.
Harper R (2012) The collection and analysis of job advertisements: A review of research method-
ology. Library and Information Research 36(112): 29–54.
Harris AH, Greer TH, Morris SA, et al. (2012) Information systems job market late 1970’S-early 
2010’S. Journal of Computer Information Systems 53(1): 72–79.
Hartl E and Hess T (2017) The role of cultural values for digital transformation: Insights from 
a Delphi study. Available at: https://aisel.aisnet.org/amcis2017/Global/Presentations/8/ 
(accessed 5 April 2022).
Hempsall K (2014) Developing leadership in higher education: Perspectives from the USA, the 
UK and Australia. Journal of Higher Education Policy and Management 36(4): 383–394.
Hess T, Matt C, Benlian A, et al. (2016) Options for formulating a digital transformation strategy. 
MIS Quarterly Executive 15(2): 103–119.
Hoberg P, Krcmar H, Oswald G, et al. (2015) Skills for digital transformation: Research Report 
2015. Available at: https://slidelegend.com/skills-for-digital-transformation-winfobase-
tum_59c179861723dd5242be0b1d.html (accessed 6 April 2022).
Horlacher A and Hess T (2016) What does a Chief Digital Officer do? Managerial tasks and roles of 
a new C-Level position in the context of digital transformation. In 49th Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences (HICSS), Koloa, HI, 5–8 January, pp.5126–5135. New York, 
NY: IEEE. DOI: 10.1109/HICSS.2016.634.
House RJ (1977) A 1976 theory of charismatic leadership. In: Hunt JG and Larson LL (eds) 
Leadership: The Cutting Edge. Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press, pp.189–
207.
Judge TA, Bono JE, Ilies R, et al. (2002) Personality and leadership: A qualitative and quantitative 
review. Journal of Applied Psychology 87(4): 765–780.
Kalargyrou V, Pescosolido AT and Kalagiros EA (2012) Leadership skills in management educa-
tion. Academy of Educationl Leadership Journal 16(4): 39–127.
Kane GC, Phillips AN, Copulsky JR, et al. (2019) How digital leadership is(n’t) different. MIT 
Sloan Management Review 60(3): 34–39.
Katz RL (1955) Skills of an effective administrator. Harvard Business Review 33(1): 33–43.
Kirkpatick SA and Locke EA (1991) Leadership: do traits matter? The Academy of Management 
Perspectives 5(2): 48–60.
Klein M (2020) Leadership characteristics in the era of digital transformation. Business And 
Management Studies: An International Journal 8(1): 883–902.
Klus M and Müller J (2020) Identifying leadership skills required in the digital age. CESifo 
Working Paper No. 8180. Available at: https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_
id=3564861
Kotter JP (1990) A Force for Change: How Leadership Differs From Management. New York, 
NY: Free Press.

--- [PAGE 24] ---
24	
German Journal of Human Resource Management 00(0)
Lenkenhoff K, Wilkens U, Zheng M, et al. (2018) Key challenges of digital business ecosystem 
development and how to cope with them. Procedia CIRP 73: 167–172.
Levy F and Murnane RJ (2004) The New Division of Labor: How Computers Are Creating the 
Next Job Market. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Li L, Su F, Zhang W, et al. (2018) Digital transformation by SME entrepreneurs: A capability 
perspective. Information Systems Journal 28(6): 1129–1157.
Longshore JM (1987) Leadership and performance beyond expectations. Academy of Management 
Review 12(4): 756.
Lord RG, De Vader CL and Alliger GM (1986) A meta-analysis of the relation between personal-
ity traits and leadership perceptions: An application of validity generalization procedures. 
Journal of Applied Psychology 71(3): 402–410.
Malakyan PG (2014) Followership in leadership studies: A case of leader-follower trade approach. 
Journal of Leadership Studies 7(4): 6–22.
Mihardjo LWW, Sasmoko S, Alamsjah F, et al. (2019) Digital leadership role in developing busi-
ness model innovation and customer experience orientation in industry 4.0. Management 
Science Letters 9(11): 1749–1762.
Miller A and Dess GG (1996) Strategic Management, 2nd edn. McGraw-Hill series in manage-
ment. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
Mintzberg H (1973) The Nature of Managerial Work. New York, NY: Harper & Row.
Mumford E (1972) Job Satisfaction: A Study of Computer Specialists. London: Longman.
Mumford MD, Zaccaro SJ, Harding FD, et al. (2000) Leadership skills for a changing world. The 
Leadership Quarterly 11(1): 11–35.
Mumford TV, Campion MA and Morgeson FP (2007) The leadership skills strataplex: Leadership 
skill requirements across organizational levels. The Leadership Quarterly 18(2): 154–166.
Nippa M (1997) Erfolgsfaktoren organisatorischer Veränderungsprozesse in Unternehmen. 
In: Nippa M and  Scharfenberg H (eds) Implementierungsmanagement. Über die Kunst, 
Reengineeringkonzepte erfolgreich umzusetzen. Gabler Verlag: Wiesbaden, pp.21–57. 
https://link.springer.com/book/10.1007/978-3-663-05854-0
O’Neill R (2009) The transformative impact of e-government on public governance in New 
Zealand. Public Management Review 11(6): 751–770.
Park JR, Lu C and Marion L (2009) Cataloging professionals in the digital environment: A content 
analysis of job descriptions. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and 
Technology 60(4): 844–857.
Partnership for 21st Century Skills (2008) 21st century skills, education & competitiveness: A 
resource and policy guide. Available at: https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED519337.pdf
Paulin S (2014) Leadership 4.0 from ego-system to eco-system: Framing a new form of adaptive 
leadership as an individual and co-creative process. AI Practitioner 16(1): 54–58.
Peng MW, Sun SL, Pinkham B, et al. (2009) The institution-based view as a third leg for a strategy 
tripod. The Academy of Management Perspectives 23(3): 63–81.
Peterson TO and An Fleet DD (2004) The ongoing legacy of R.L. Katz. Management Decision 
42(10): 1297–1308.
Porfírio JA, Carrilho T, Felício JA, et al. (2021) Leadership characteristics and digital transforma-
tion. Journal of Business Research 124(1): 610–619.
Porter ME and Heppelmann JE (2015) How smart, connected products are transforming compa-
nies. Harvard Business Review 93(10): 96–114.
Reck F and Fliaster A (2019) Four profiles of successful digital executives. MIT Sloan Management 
Review 60: 1–7. https://sloanreview.mit.edu/article/four-profiles-of-successful-digital-executives/
Rickards T, Smaje K and Sohoni V (2015) Transformer in Chief: The New Chief Digital Officer. 
Available at: https://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/organization/our-insights/trans-
former-in-chief-the-new-chief-digital-officer (accessed 5 April 2022).

--- [PAGE 25] ---
Gilli et al.	
25
Rogers B (2016) Why 84% of companies fail at digital transformation. Available at: https://
www.forbes.com/sites/brucerogers/2016/01/07/why-84-of-companies-fail-at-digital-
transformation/#23a930e9397b (accessed 5 April 2022).
Royle J and Laing A (2014) The digital marketing skills gap: Developing a digital marketer model 
for the communication industries. International Journal of Information Management 34(2): 
65–73.
Sashkin M (1989) The visionary leader. In: Conger JA and Kannungo RN (eds) Charismatic 
Leadership: The Elusive Factor in Organizational Effectiveness, 2nd edn. San Francisco, 
CA: Jossey-Bass, pp.122–160.
Schneider M (2018) Digitalization of production, human capital, and organizational capital. In: 
Harteis C (ed.) The Impact of Digitalization in the Workplace. Cham: Springer, pp.39–52.
Scholz C (2014) Generation Z: Wie sie tickt, was sie verändert und warum sie uns alle ansteckt. 
Weinheim: John Wiley & Sons.
Sebastian IM, Ross JW, Beath C, et al. (2017) How big old companies navigate digital transforma-
tion. MIS Quarterly Executive 16(3): 6.
Sia SK, Soh C and Weill P (2016) How DBS bank pursued a digital business strategy. MIS 
Quarterly Executive 15(2): 105–121.
Singh A and Hess T (2017) How Chief Digital Officers promote the digital transformation of their 
companies. MIS Quarterly Executive 16(1): 1–17.
Sousa MJ and Rocha (2019) Skills for disruptive digital business. Journal of Business Research 
94(4): 257–263.
Sow M and Aborbie S (2018) Impact of leadership on digital transformation. Business and 
Economic Research 8(3): 139.
Stogdill RM (1948) Personal factors associated with leadership: A survey of the literature. The 
Journal of Psychology 25(1): 35–71.
Strauss AL (1987) Qualitative Analysis for Social Scientists. New York, NY: Cambridge 
University Press.
Strohmeier S (2020) Digital human resource management: A conceptual clarification. German 
Journal of Human Resource Management 34(3): 345–365.
Tapscott D (2015) The Digital Economy: Rethinking Promise and Peril in the Age of Networked 
Intelligence, 2nd edn. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill Education.
Todd PA, McKeen JD and Gallupe RB (1995) The evolution of IS job skills: A content analysis of 
IS job advertisements from 1970 to 1990. MIS Quarterly 19(1): 1–27.
Tollman P, Keenan P, Mingardon S, et al. (2017) Getting smart about change management. BCG 
Perspectives. Available at: https://www.bcg.com/publications/2017/change-management-get-
ting-smart-about-change-management.aspx (accessed 5 April 2022).
Uhl-Bien M, Marion R and McKelvey B (2007) Complexity leadership theory: Shifting leader-
ship from the industrial age to the knowledge era. The Leadership Quarterly 18(4): 298–318.
Vale-Feigl A (2021) People, not technology, drive digital transformation. Available at: https://
www.td.org/magazines/td-magazine/people-not-technology-drive-digital-transformation 
(accessed 5 April 2022).
Van Dijk JAGM (2005) The Deepening Divide. London: SAGE.
Van Laar E, Van Deursen AJA, Van Dijk JAG, et al. (2017) The relation between 21st-century 
skills and digital skills: A systematic literature review. Computers in Human Behavior 72(1): 
577–588.
Vasconcelos JB, Kimble C and Rocha Á (2016) A special issue on knowledge and competence 
management: Developing enterprise solutions. Information Systems Frontiers 18(6): 1035–
1039.
Verboncu I and Zeininger L (2015) The manager and the managerial tools: Job description. Review 
of International Comparative Management 16(5): 603–614.

--- [PAGE 26] ---
26	
German Journal of Human Resource Management 00(0)
Vial G (2019) Understanding digital transformation: A review and a research agenda. The Journal 
of Strategic Information Systems 28(2): 118–144.
Voigt BF, Mänz K and Wilkens U (2014) What leadership pattern can be observed in IPS2 work 
systems when compared with production and service? Procedia CIRP 16: 277–282.
Voogt J and Roblin NP (2012) A comparative analysis of international frameworks for 21stcentury 
competences: Implications for national curriculum policies. Journal of Curriculum Studies 
44(3): 299–321.
Wade M and Obwegeser N (2019) How to choose the right digital leader for your company. MIT 
Sloan Management Review 60: 1–4.
Weill P and Woerner SL (2015) Thriving in an increasingly digital ecosystem. MIT Sloan 
Management Review 56(4): 27–34.
Yammarino F (2013) Leadership. Journal of Leadership & Organizational Studies 20(2): 149–155.
Yukl G (1981) Leadership in Organizations. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Yukl G (2012) Effective leadership behavior: What we know and what questions need more atten-
tion. The Academy of Management Perspectives 26(4): 66–85.
Yukl G (2013) Leadership in Organizations, 8th edn. Boston, MA: Pearson.
Zaccaro SJ, Green JP, Dubrow S, et al. (2018) Leader individual differences, situational param-
eters, and leadership outcomes: A comprehensive review and integration. The Leadership 
Quarterly 29(1): 2–43.
Zaccaro SJ, Kemp C and Bader P (2004) Leader traits and attributes. In: Antonakis J and Day DV 
(eds) The Nature of Leadership. London: SAGE, pp.101–124.
Zeike S, Bradbury K, Lindert L, et al. (2019) Digital leadership skills and associations with psy-
chological well-being. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health 
16(14): 2628.
Zhu W, Avolio BJ and Walumbwa FO (2009) Moderating role of follower characteristics 
with transformational leadership and follower work engagement. Group & Organization 
Management 34(5): 590–619.
