
--- [PAGE 1] ---
International Journal of Production Research
ISSN: 0020-7543 (Print) 1366-588X (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/tprs20
Technology isn't enough for Industry 4.0: on SMEs
and hindrances to digital transformation
Andreas Kornmaaler Hansen, Lasse Christiansen & Astrid Heidemann
Lassen
To cite this article: Andreas Kornmaaler Hansen, Lasse Christiansen & Astrid Heidemann
Lassen (2025) Technology isn't enough for Industry 4.0: on SMEs and hindrances to digital
transformation, International Journal of Production Research, 63:18, 6585-6605, DOI:
10.1080/00207543.2024.2305800
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2024.2305800
© 2024 The Author(s). Published by Informa
UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis
Group.
View supplementary material 
Published online: 31 Jan 2024.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 9655
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 50 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=tprs20

--- [PAGE 2] ---
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PRODUCTION RESEARCH
2025, VOL. 63, NO. 18, 6585–6605
https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2024.2305800
Technology isn’t enough for Industry 4.0: on SMEs and hindrances to digital
transformation
Andreas Kornmaaler Hansen
a,b, Lasse Christiansen
a,b and Astrid Heidemann Lassen
a
aCenter for Industrial Production, Aalborg University, Aalborg, Denmark; bTechnology and Business Development, University College of
Northern Denmark, Aalborg, Denmark
ABSTRACT
Despite a general lack of examples showcasing seamless implementation of industry 4.0, talks of a
human-centric, resilient, and sustainable industry 5.0 have already begun. But are the managers and
workers of manufacturing enterprises today even ready for that? Digital transformation is still slow-
going, especially within small- and medium-sized companies. Supported by an existing framework
and interpretive structural model for digitalisation, we argue that a big part of digital transformation
depends on the workers’ competencies. Guided by the research question: How can the approach to
competence development in SMEs explain patterns of slow digital transformation?, we investigate 30
manufacturing SMEs pursuing digitalisation. While manufacturing companies are aware of the need
for additional competencies, few are actively working towards obtaining them. We expand on a the-
oretical model for smart manufacturing determinants and argue how a scaffold is needed to support
SMEs in the early stages of digitalisation to increase understanding of core concepts, i.e. Indus-
try 4.0 concepts and available technologies, data handling, integration capability, upskilling and
training, and strategic management capabilities. We propose that a scaffolding approach to compe-
tence development can enable knowledge acquisition and the formation of digital transformation
strategies.
ARTICLE HISTORY
Received 18 March 2022
Accepted 3 January 2024
KEYWORDS
Empirical research; industry
4.0; industry 5.0; competence
strategy; digitalisation;
barriers
1. Introduction
Since the introduction of industry 4.0 as a German strate-
gic initiative in 2011 (Kagermann et al. 2013), both large-
and small-sized manufacturing companies have worked
towards leveraging or redefining their production facili-
ties through digital transformation efforts (Horváth and
Szabó 2019; Møller et al. 2023). Typically, the goal is a
more interconnected and efficient production by exploit-
ing data through new technologies (Xu, Xu, and Li 2018)
and leveraging the information to respond in real-time
both on the factory and supply chain level (also referred
to as smart manufacturing1 Kusiak (2018)). This inter-
connectivity requires well-thought-out system architec-
tures capable of supporting horizontal integration across
value and supply chains and vertical integration through-
out the entire organisation from front-line staff to the top
floor management (Pivoto et al. 2021). It is a significant
and complex feat to manage and one that many SMEs
have yet to overcome.
Researchers have tried to understand these complexi-
ties, map out the barriers that manufacturing companies
CONTACT Andreas Kornmaaler Hansen
akhan@mp.aau.dk
Center for Industrial Production, Aalborg University, Fibigerstraede 16, Aalborg 9220,
Denmark; Technology and Business Development, University College of Northern Denmark, Soﬁendalsvej 60, Aalborg 9200, Denmark
This article has been corrected with minor changes. These changes do not impact the academic content of the article.
Supplemental data for this article can be accessed online at https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2024.2305800.
experience, and pinpoint focus areas needed to advance
digital maturity towards industry 4.0 (Larsen, Magnus-
son, and Lassen 2022). A few common barriers identified
are resource availability (Horváth and Szabó 2019; Kam-
ble, Gunasekaran, and Sharma 2018), lack of knowledge
(Masood and Sonntag 2020; Stentoft et al. 2021), lack of
skills (Estensoro et al. 2022; Horváth and Szabó 2019),
and lack of technological and strategical expertise (Moeuf
et al. 2020), where critical success factors include a skilled
workforce through training and exploitation of data man-
agement (Moeuf et al. 2020; Stentoft et al. 2021). While
SMEs have good opportunities for internal collaboration
and employee involvement, they meet considerable barri-
ers when it comes to their human resources (Horváth and
Szabó 2019; Masood and Sonntag 2020; Matt et al. 2020;
Stentoft et al. 2021). The skills of the industrial workers
need to be on par with the new technology. Otherwise,
the potential productivity gains will be left unfulfilled
if workers cannot operate the technology (Lassen and
Waehrens 2021; Moldovan 2019). Thus, it is evident that
© 2024 The Author(s). Published by Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-
nd/4.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, and is not altered, transformed, or built upon
in any way. The terms on which this article has been published allow the posting of the Accepted Manuscript in a repository by the author(s) or with their consent.

--- [PAGE 3] ---
6586
A. K. HANSEN ET AL.
the digitalisation challenge is not purely technological.
In light of this, we argue that manufacturing enterprises
interested in digital transformation should address com-
petencies early in the process. This, in turn, requires
visionary and strategic managers of enterprises who
both understand the possibilities of digitalisation and the
importance of their human capital (Liboni et al. 2019). In
this context, SMEs are particularly interesting to research
because they make up a large proportion of the manufac-
turing industry (99.8% in Europe Gorgels et al. 2022) but
are very slow to adopt smart technology (Buer et al. 2020;
Lassen and Waehrens 2021). This means that SMEs are
missing out on increased productivity through indus-
try 4.0 solutions (Szász et al. 2020), especially if they
do not invest in relevant knowledge and skills (Cirillo
et al. 2023).
In this article, we seek to understand better the reasons
for the slow digital transformation of SMEs in manu-
facturing industries. We move beyond merely identify-
ing the particular characteristics of barriers and aim to
explain how the approach to competence development
in SMEs relates to the slow digital transformation we
observe. We do so by examining empirical results from
30 Danish small and medium manufacturing enterprises
pursuing smart manufacturing. We approach this matter
through the lens of a human-centric perspective follow-
ing the emerging suggestion of an Industry 5.0 approach.
In particular, we seek to answer the question: How can
the approach to competence development in SMEs explain
patterns of slow digital transformation?
2. Literature review
Increased attention to the workers and their vital role
in digital transformation has led to the concept called
industry 5.0 (Breque, Nul, and Petridis 2021). Indus-
try 5.0 generally relies on the same technological foun-
dation as industry 4.0, although it focuses more on a
human-centric approach (Ibid.). In industry 5.0 the well-
being and upskilling of industrial workers are explicitly
included in strategic considerations. It is more value-
driven than technology-driven like industry 4.0 (Xu
et al. 2021). Thus it may be seen as an extension to
the industry 4.0 agenda rather than a new industrial
revolution (Ibid.). Initiatives such as industry 5.0 bring
increased focus to competencies for smart manufactur-
ing and the interplay between sustainability, technology
and human workers. Hence, it is a more holistic approach
to the digital transformation of manufacturing indus-
tries. While the vision of industry 5.0 is a step in a
more human-centric direction, it is important to remem-
ber how industry 5.0 needs the foundation that industry
4.0 provides. Therefore, if the digital transformation of
companies pursuing industry 4.0 is slow and stuck in
early stages, then industry 5.0 must be presumed basi-
cally non-existent. While industry 4.0 shows promise, it
has also been criticised for being too focused on technol-
ogy and less so on the role of the industry workers and
how to build up the needed competencies (Lassen and
Waehrens 2021; Neumann et al. 2021). However, neither
small nor large companies can escape that industry 4.0
is much about knowledge management. And to this end,
there is an inherent relationship between the available
competencies and the extent to which a firm can leverage
the benefits of digital tools (Capestro and Kinkel 2020).
2.1. Competencies for digital transformation
An increasing amount of literature has focused on the
need for competencies within smart manufacturing and
identified them through questionnaires (Moldovan 2019;
Motyl et al. 2017), literature reviews (Belinski et al. 2020;
Hecklau et al. 2016; Jerman, Pejić Bach, and Berton-
celj 2018; Kipper et al. 2021) and a few empirical stud-
ies (Fareri et al. 2020; Mahmood et al. 2021). Yet, it is
difficult to list a definitive and objective set of compe-
tencies as it is not a precisely defined metric (Anani-
adou and Claro 2009), and the meaning of competence
varies across fields (Rangraz and Pareto 2021). However,
according to Hecklau et al. (2016), there is generally a
need for technical, methodological, social, and personal
competencies:
Technical competencies are needed to identify and
build the needed connectivity. As work increasingly
moves to digital platforms, there is a need to develop
more profound technical knowledge, allowing workers
to move away from purely operational tasks to more
strategic and remotely operated tasks. Specialised tech-
nical knowledge, coding skills and cyber security aware-
ness are necessary to navigate and create this technical
environment.
Methodological competencies are thus needed due to
the flat hierarchical structure of smart manufacturing
enterprises and increased communication across devices
and people. More decision-making power is laid in the
hands of the individual worker, which increases the need
for process knowledge and the ability to seek out and
solve errors through data analysis and interpretation
skills.
Social competencies are needed to effectively use the
increased communication ability across departments
through accessible IT platforms (e.g. Slack or Teams).
Social competencies also pertain to navigating cultural
differences and international teams. Good communi-
cation skills are essential in order to share knowledge
among peers, which will become crucial in retaining

--- [PAGE 4] ---
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PRODUCTION RESEARCH
6587
Figure 1. A layered overview of smart technology consisting of: Information and communication technology (ICT), Computing tech-
nology, Operations technology (OT), Sensor and data acquisition technology and Human-machine Interaction (HMI). Abbreviations:
radio frequency identiﬁcation (RFID), enterprise resource planning (ERP), manufacturing execution system (MES), automated guided
vehicle (AGV), autonomous mobile robot (AMR), Computer-aided design (CAD), programmable logic controllers (PLC). Adapted from
(Ghobakhloo 2020).
knowledge in the organisation or making tacit knowledge
explicit for it to be implemented in digital processes.
Personal competencies pertains to people’s attitude
towards change and efforts in learning new knowledge.
Industry 4.0 brings a more flexible production, where
workers move more fluidly between tasks. It is impor-
tant to be able to accept this change in how work tasks
are more flexibly structured (Hecklau et al. 2016).
Many of the needed competence areas fall outside
purely technical areas and relate to how people per-
ceive change, approach problem-solving, and the need for
a supportive environment around learning. Therefore,
almost purely fixating on technical competences may cre-
ate a bottle-neck for smart manufacturing adoption as
foundational competence areas are overlooked.
2.2. Existing models for smart manufacturing
adoption
While researchers have advocated for social, personal,
and methodological competencies, they seem primarily
absent from seminal research streams on industry 4.0.
Due to the inherent technical nature of industry 4.0,
most literature has focused on enabling technologies,
often neglecting human factors (Neumann et al. 2021).
The vast interconnectivity of factories and supply chains
envisioned for industry 4.0 requires vertical and horizon-
tal integration that is capable of tying together a broad
range of smart technologies in cyber-physical systems
(CPS), which enables smart manufacturing. See Figure 1
for a layered overview of smart technology examples
(Ghobakhloo 2020). CPS, as such, can be perceived as a
technical umbrella term within industry 4.0 that covers
a broad area from the backend software, enabling hori-
zontal and vertical data integration to the very frontend
interfaces and machines, which are met by manufactur-
ing workers across all layers in an organisation, thus inte-
grating physical systems with communication networks
(Pivoto et al. 2021). In a CPS, the conventional hier-
archical pyramid structure of manufacturing processes
and communication transforms into an interconnected
cross-layer system, where each layer can communicate
in a device-to-device communication setup (Antonino
et al. 2019; Flores, Xu, and Lu 2020). It is an intricate sys-
tem which needs careful planning. Therefore, different
technical and theoretical reference architecture models
have emerged to standardise and streamline the com-
plexity of digital transformation, as summarised by both
Pivoto et al. (2021) and Nakagawa et al. (2021), see
Table 1.
The various reference architecture models show that
the technical backbone of smart manufacturing is still
under development. However, these ideas and smart
manufacturing models still need to be communicated
efficiently to the people within manufacturing, which
proves challenging due to the abstraction level of the
ideas, the broad interdisciplinary nature of the architec-
tures, and the varying level of education in manufactur-
ing.
The reference architecture models are currently not
concerned with human factors, despite being crucial to
their successful implementation (Sharpe et al. 2019).
They merely adopt a technical focus (see Table 1). Addi-
tionally, limited focus has been put on operationalising
the architecture models, which often requires bespoke
customisation (Nakagawa et al. 2021). For SMEs, a more
grounded approach that specifies concrete focus areas
may be more useful compared to complete technical ref-
erence architectures, which assume a higher digital matu-
rity level than most SMEs possess (Mittal et al. 2018).

--- [PAGE 5] ---
6588
A. K. HANSEN ET AL.
Table 1. Various industry 4.0 models and their type, focus, and view on competences.
I4.0 model
Type
Focus
View on competencies
Available documentation
RAMI4.0
RA
Technical
(Hankel and Rexroth 2015)
IIRA
RA
Technical
70 page document (Lin et al. 2022)
SITAM
RA
Technical
(Kassner et al. 2017)
IVRA Next
RA
Technical
36 page document updated in 2019 at
the Hannover fair IVCI (2018)
IBM Industry 4.0
RA
Technical
Limited information on IBM’s website
(IBM 2017)
LASFA
RA
Technical
(Resman et al. 2019)
5C
RA
Technical
Conference paper (Lee, Bagheri, and
Kao 2015)
SM Adoption Framework
PM
Socio-technical
Journal publication (Mittal et al. 2020)
Determinants of SM adoption
PM (ISM)
Socio-technical
Journal publication (Ghobakhloo 2020)
Development stages & resources
toward I4.0
Step-up PM
Socio-technical
Journal publication (Estensoro
et al. 2022)
Notes:
= Not part of the model and no mention of human-centred aspects such as competences, skills or training.
= Not part of the model. Brief mention
of human-centred aspects.
= Part of the model: human-centred aspects are an integrated part of the model. Abbreviations: Reference architecture (RA),
process model (PM), Interpretive Structural Modeling (ISM), smart manufacturing (SM).
2.3. Smart manufacturing adoption in SMEs
Adoption of smart manufacturing solutions in SMEs is
slow compared to large enterprises (Buer et al. 2020;
Larsen, Magnusson, and Lassen 2022). Larger manu-
facturing companies tend to be more well-equipped for
undertaking a digital transformation when it comes to
financial resources, access to a global workforce, and
overall business incentives to increase competitiveness
(Horváth and Szabó 2019). SMEs do hold some advan-
tages over large and multi-national enterprises when it
comes to digitalisation, e.g. lower organisational com-
plexity and fewer barriers to collaboration (Horváth and
Szabó 2019). However, large-scale digital transformation
initiatives are financially riskier for SMEs, and they often
lack IT skills, which leads to a need for external support
(Hansen and Hansen 2023; Moeuf et al. 2020). There is
no ’one size fits all’ solution. While reference architecture
models outline a high-level structure of industry 4.0, few
standardised solutions exist and the implementation fol-
lowing a reference architecture model still require highly
specialised knowledge that is absent in SMEs. This indi-
cates that SMEs should start with smaller steps towards
their digital transformation (Buer et al. 2020). To bet-
ter guide digitalisation efforts in SMEs, process models
concerned with the operational adoption of smart tech-
nologies have recently emerged (Ghobakhloo 2020; Mit-
tal et al. 2020). They recognise the importance of man-
ager awareness and openness to industry 4.0 to initiate
change. Mittal et al. (2020) proposed and tested a frame-
work for smart manufacturing adoption in SMEs from a
technical point of view, focusing on data structure and
connectivity capabilities. They analysed their case based
on previously categorised ’toolboxes’, which are bun-
dles containing concrete focus areas where the SME was
notably lacking, e.g. in data analytics. They found that
successful steps towards smart manufacturing in SMEs
really came down to the awareness of the managers (Mit-
tal et al. 2020). Similarly, Ghobakhloo (2020) unwrapped
which mechanisms are crucial for manufacturers pur-
suing smart factory technology implementation. They
conducted a structured literature review combined with
expert input and used an interpretive structural mod-
elling method to identify determinants for implementing
smart manufacturing information and digital technolo-
gies (Ghobakhloo 2020). These smart technologies were
divided into a layered overview as presented in Figure 1.
Ghobakhloo’s model of determinants describes a
step-wise process to implement smart technology (see
Figure 2). For example, a company that seeks to
implement smart technology has to start with man-
agement perceiving the benefits of digitalisation, have
financial and management support, and work on strategic
roadmaps before employee qualification is undertaken
and the technical implementation towards smart man-
ufacturing can move forward. Thus, pinpointing that
employee qualifications are a determinant for achieving
smart manufacturing (Ghobakhloo 2020). As such, the
path towards industry 4.0 combines people, organisa-
tion and technology in complex socio-technical systems
(Liboni et al. 2019; Lundgren et al. 2022).
This line of thinking contrasts the technically abstract
and holistic nature of the aforementioned reference
architecture models, which practically ignore the human
aspect of smart manufacturing and operate on a level

--- [PAGE 6] ---
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PRODUCTION RESEARCH
6589
Figure 2. Ghobakhloo’s model of determinants for adoption of smart technologies (Ghobakhloo 2020).
unsuited for the reality of SMEs (Mittal et al. 2018). Addi-
tionally, such a standpoint is similar to the more human-
centric approach to digital transformation, which we
argue in favour of in this paper. Hence, a socio-technical
process model is a solid analytical starting point for
our research on how the approach to competence devel-
opment in manufacturing SMEs influences their digital
transformation, which may help explain the slow digital
transformation in SMEs. For this, case studies on digital
transformation have been called for Moeuf et al. (2020)
and Ghobakhloo and Ching (2019).
Therefore, we investigate how a representative sam-
ple of SMEs within manufacturing matches the model of
determinants for smart technology adoption and where
they fall short. Identifying the areas where SMEs do not
fit into the model may help explain why SMEs struggle
to engage properly with digital transformation and thus
contribute to theory related to digital transformation by
expanding on the model of determinants. This was inves-
tigated empirically through a research program aimed
towards SMEs to elevate their awareness of industry 4.0,
as suggested by Buer et al. (2020). Essential competencies
have been identified, enabling technologies and decision
aid models exist. However, it still appears hard for SMEs
to transform. An in-depth study of multiple manufac-
turers can help explain why through a human-centred
perspective.
3. Methodology
We applied a multiple case study approach to gain
detailed insights into how manufacturing SMEs approach
competence development and how this, in turn, influ-
ences their digital transformation. In doing so, we aim
for results more practical in nature (Flyvbjerg 2006), and
to provide more empirically founded research to under-
stand human-centred approaches, which recently have
been promoted (Grosse et al. 2023). Engaging directly
with the cases combined with physical on-site company
visits allows follow-up questions, which help describe
real-life challenges that may not appear in surveys. By
focusing on a broader selection, it is possible to compare
similar issues from multiple sources. As such, this posi-
tions multiple case studies well in terms of developing,
testing and refining theories (Ketokivi and Choi 2014;
Voss, Johnson, and Godsell 2016).
We take our point of departure in the model of deter-
minants by Ghobakhloo (2020) and contrast our findings
with the themes from the model. Therefore, we approach
the phenomenon of digital transformation abductively to
expand the existing model of determinants for digital-
isation (i.e. Figure 2) through a multiple case study of
SMEs. Over the course of three years, we engaged mul-
tiple groups of SMEs in four engagements lasting three-
four months each, providing them material on industry
4.0 and hands-on experience with smart manufacturing
technologies to create a common language and inspire
strategic thinking related to industry 4.0 through digital
vision and maturity workshops.
3.1. Data selection
The focus was to gain insights into SMEs’ digital trans-
formation approaches. Hence, the central data selection
criteria for the cases were based on the following:
• Enterprises had to be small and medium-sized enter-
prises (SMEs) within manufacturing. SMEs comprise
a large portion of the manufacturing industry, yet
their digital transformation moves slowly. Thus, SMEs

--- [PAGE 7] ---
6590
A. K. HANSEN ET AL.
were chosen as our unit of analysis. The criterion
is operationalised through the EU’s definition of an
SME: small = < 50 employees and ≤e 10 mil-
lion annual balance sheet; medium-sized = < 250
employees and ≤e 50 million annual balance sheet
(European Commission 2003).
• Manufacturing companies interested in digital trans-
formation. This ensured a fit to our unit of analysis
while it increased the chances of engaged participation
in the research. This criterion was operationalised as
active participation in a large-scale research effort on
digitalisation called Innovation Factory North (Møller
et al. 2023)).
• SMEs from a broad selection of manufacturing indus-
tries. This was to obtain a representative sample of
manufacturing enterprises and gain a broader insight
into actual focus areas or uncertainties. Including
manufacturers from a diverse range of manufacturing
industries was deliberate, as it enabled us to iden-
tify larger patterns representative of the current land-
scape within SMEs related to digital transformation.
Additionally, working with a representative sample
strengthens the transferability beyond just the sample.
All the cases chosen were from the Danish manufac-
turing sector, which allowed for comparable social and
cultural context specificities through in-person engage-
ments.
3.2. Data collection
The empirical data was collected through a learning pro-
cess inspired by cognitive apprenticeship (Collins and
Kapur 2014), which engaged managers and operational
staff from a total of 30 SMEs. Cognitive apprenticeship
roughly follows four dimensions:
• Content: Domain knowledge about key concepts, pro-
cedures, and subject matter facts.
• Methods: A prominent method is called scaffolding,
which means that learning is structured and sup-
ported for the learner.
• Sequencing: Variation in complexity and diversity of
the tasks presented to the learner. This may be used
along with the scaffolding method.
• Sociology: Situated learning where the learner is taught
or works in the context of realistic tasks and uses
personal goals for intrinsic motivation e.g. within dig-
italisation.
The companies were interested in, and in the early
stages of, digital transformation and multiple com-
pany representatives participated in structured learning
activities aimed to raise their awareness of industry 4.0
(via industry 4.0 domain knowledge, i.e. content), where
technologies listed in Figure 1 were used as a reference.
See Table 2 for an overview of the SMEs and the company
representatives who participated in this study.
The activities consisted of two physical workshops at
the university and two on-site company visits at the com-
pany (scaffolding, sequencing); see Figure 3. Representa-
tives from 4–6 companies were present in each workshop,
where debate was encouraged between companies and
based on their personal digitalisation challenges (soci-
ology). The on-site company vists were conducted with
two academic sparring partners for each company. The
overall company engagement was applied to 10 groups of
SMEs over a period of three years.
3.2.1. Data extraction
We consistently extracted statements from notes taken
during the workshops by assigned note-takers. Thus,
no voice recordings were made. However, the note-
takers were instructed to type up responses as verba-
tim as possible. The workshops were conducted using a
semi-structured approach. For example, the 360 Degree
Maturity Assessment (360DMA), which involves struc-
tured learning through a dialogue between assessing and
assessed teams, enhancing understanding of contextual
factors and guiding context-specific improvement rec-
ommendations (Colli et al. 2019) that provided the struc-
ture for the maturity discussions in Workshop 1. Addi-
tionally, the on-site company visits at the SMEs’ facilities
acted as a follow-up on the workshops and were used as
confirmation and triangulation of the information gath-
ered during the workshops. See Table 3 for an overview
of the data collection. A more detailed description of the
methods and approaches used in the workshops can be
found in the supplementary material connected to this
article, as recommended by Pratt, Kaplan, and Whitting-
ton (2020) to ensure the trustworthiness of qualitative
studies.
3.3. Data analysis
From the notes taken during the workshops, observa-
tions, and company visits, 414 unique statements related
to the approaches to competence development and digi-
talisation were extracted and processed using QSR NVivo
(NVivo 2022). The data analysis went through two stages:
i) identification of statements which fit into the model
of determinants in Figure 2 referred to as the engage-
ment cluster (EC); and ii) identification and analysis of
the statements which did not fit the model of determi-
nants referred to as the hindrance cluster (HC). We used
the model of determinants in Figure 2 as a theoretical

--- [PAGE 8] ---
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PRODUCTION RESEARCH
6591
Table 2. Overview of sample enterprises used for our study.
#
Size
Industry
Representative
1
S
Water Cutting
Co-owner
2
M
Steel and Metalwork
Head of Production
3
M
Food
COO
4
M
Steel and Metalwork
Consultant of Operations, Head of Quality and Production
5
M
Industrial Freezing
COO, Planning Coordinator
6
M
Steel and Metalwork
CEO, CFO, Head of Production
7
M
Steel and Metalwork
Head of Product Engineering, Head of Production, Head of Sales
8
M
Home and Living
Production Manager, Product Engineer
9
S
Automation
COO, Business Development
10
S
Ventilation
Foreman, Production Manager
11
M
Automation
Director of Technology, Sales Director
12
M
Industrial Freezing
Foreman, Production Manager, Service Manager, Mechanical Engineering
Manager
13
M
Entertainment Equipment
COO, Head of Logistics, Product Engineer
14
M
Steel and Metalwork
CEO, Business development director
15
S
Ventilation
CEO, Technical Engineer
16
S
Food
Factory Manager
17
M
Food
CEO, CTO
18
M
Energy
Head of Engineering
19
M
Ventilation
Quality and Production Manager, VP Supply chain & Manufacturing, Production
Planner
20
M
Steel and Metalwork
COO, Supply Chain Manager
21
M
Process Manufacturing
Site Technology & Asset Manager, Production Manager
22
M
Steel and Metalwork
CEO, SC Manager, Quality Manager, Procurement and Planning Team Leader,
Technical Sales Support Manager, Assembly Manager
23
M
Steel and Metalwork
Factory Manager
24
S
Electronic Hardware
CEO
25
S
Automation
Automation Project Manager
26
M
Electronic Hardware
Production Engineering Manager, IT Product Developer
27
M
Home and Living
Logistics Manager, Procurement Assistant
28
S
Hydraulics
CEO
29
M
Energy
Project Engineer, Production Manager
30
M
Steel and Metalwork
Plant Manager, Sales Manager, Quality Manager
Note: It shows enterprise size Small (S < 50 employees) and Medium (M < 250 employees), the industry type, and the company representatives who participated
in the study.
Figure 3. Overview of company engagement within a learning factory environment from Møller et al. (2023).
framework so that statements, where the SMEs described
some level of engagement with the model, were coded
according to the model of determinants’ 11 dependency
themes (see Figure 2).
3.3.1. Stage 1: engagement cluster
147 statements matched the model of determinants on
some level of engagement with the model themes. This
resulted in the engagement cluster (EC) in the first half of
Table 4. Furthermore, the level of engagement was deter-
mined based on a non-statistical approach to reaching
classifications of high, medium or low levels of engage-
ment. The following logic was applied:
• High levels of engagement: expressions of clear and
dedicated activities, strategies or knowledge;
Table 3. Extent and type of data collection.
Intervention
Data collection method
Duration
Workshop
Observation, semi-structured interviews based on 360DMA, scenario thinking, roadmap
discussion. Assigned note-takers for every workshop.
360 hrs∗
On-site company visits
Observation, semi-structured interviews around vision, 360DMA and roadmap. Assigned
note-taker for every engagement.
75 hrs
Note: ∗Total estimate spread out on each company, e.g. a 6 hour workshop with 5 participating companies accounts for 30 hours of data collection.

--- [PAGE 9] ---
6592
A. K. HANSEN ET AL.
Table 4. Level of engagement and mismatch with model of determinants in the engagement cluster (EC) and the hindrance cluster
(HC): Perceived Beneﬁts (PB), Financial Resource Availability (FRA), Management Support (MS), Strategic Roadmapping for Digitalisation
(SRD), Employee Qualiﬁcation (EQ), Digital Maturity (DM), Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR), Seamless Integration Capability (SIC),
Openness to Change (OC), Operations Technology Maturity (OTM), Cybersecurity Maturity (CM).
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Level 4
Level 5
Level 6
Cluster
Engagement
PB
FRA
MS
SRD
EQ
DM
CSR
SIC
OC
OTM
CM
Total
EC
Low
2
0
0
0
6
1
3
3
1
0
0
16
EC
Medium
16
7
7
0
11
7
2
2
2
6
0
60
EC
High
11
6
4
3
6
13
1
1
11
14
1
71
EC
29
13
11
3
23
21
6
6
14
20
1
147
HC
Uncertain/challenged
19
3
5
23
25
44
0
27
9
24
1
180
Mis-match
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
88
HC
267
° Example from Employee Qualifications (EQ): 27.
’Dedicated education budget used on digitalisation
courses for managers’
• Medium levels of engagement: expressions of activities,
strategies or knowledge lacking indication of either
high or low levels of engagement.
° Example from Employee Qualifications (EQ): 3.
’Hired external consultants to help with ERP sys-
tem but not how to involve employees’
• Low levels of engagement: expressions of sparse and
unspecific activities, strategies, or knowledge
° Example from Employee Qualifications (EQ): 27.
‘We currently rely on an unstructured peer-to-peer
training process’
3.3.2. Stage 2: hindrance cluster
178 statements were found to relate to the 11 depen-
dency themes, but with an emphasis on how the compa-
nies experienced uncertainties, challenges or hindrances
related to these. This meant that no level of active engage-
ment was expressed through these statements. These
178 statements were categorised as the hindrance cluster
(HC) and were further analysed to identify explanatory
patterns. Also included in the hindrance cluster were 88
statements which did not match any of the 11 themes.
To make sense of the statements in the hindrance cluster,
we applied the approach and terminology introduced by
Gioia and Chittipeddi (1991) and later updated by Gioia,
Corley, and Hamilton (2013).
The first step was to develop the first-order concepts
from our sample. A single first-order concept consists of
multiple related sample statements. Thus, the statements
initially went through an open coding process when
extracted from the workshop notes, and later, through
axial coding, we connected related statements to tentative
abstract codes that supported the development of first-
order concepts. For example, 14 sample statements were
grouped together to form the first-order concept ’manual
data processes’.
The second step was to analyse the first-order concepts
and truly encompass their meaning. This relied on an
iterative process where the sample statements were revis-
ited to ensure refinement. For example, first-order con-
cepts that captured challenges regarding comprehending
technology and industry 4.0 concepts, difficulties under-
standing how to develop strategies and perceive value,
and knowledge differences between management and
employees were joined under the second-order theme
lack of understanding.
The third step involves distilling the first-order con-
cepts and second-order themes into aggregate dimen-
sions, which contain the essence of all the underlying
codes and statements. For this, we relied on multiple
rounds of coding, performed first independently by two
of the authors, and then revisited and discussed among all
to identify any differing interpretations and reach a con-
sensus on how the data should be interpreted. For this
step, we reviewed literature to inform us how the aggre-
gated dimension could be interpreted. This meant that
an aggregated dimension initially was coded as ’knowl-
edge acquisition’, but through revisiting the sample and
reviewing the literature on prior knowledge (e.g. Dochy,
de Rijdt, and Dyck 2002), the aggregated dimension was
refined to a more abstract ’content knowledge’ as this
more accurately described the underlying issue of how
the companies may overcome the challenges related to
their lack of understanding of available technologies, data
handling and integration challenges. By following this
approach and thoroughly documenting the steps taken
throughout the analysis in a data structure, we strive to
reach theoretical saturation (Gioia, Corley, and Hamil-
ton 2013). The resulting data structure representing the
first-order concepts, second-order themes, and aggregate
dimensions are presented in Section 4.2.
4. Findings
In the following, we present the findings from the analysis
of the 414 unique statements relative to the state-of-the-
art understanding of how companies adopt smart tech-
nologies, as suggested by Ghobakhloo (2020). First, the
results from the engagement cluster will be presented in

--- [PAGE 10] ---
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PRODUCTION RESEARCH
6593
Figure 4. The data structure based on the hindrance cluster.
each of the 11 dependency themes in Section 4.1. Then,
the findings from the hindrance cluster and the Gioia
methodology will be presented in Section 4.2. This anal-
ysis forms the basis for developing an updated model of
determinants, which highlights areas where the compa-
nies need support in order to engage with the technol-
ogy adoption and digital transformation in Section 4.3.
Finally, we advocate that a supportive scaffold be made
available for SMEs throughout the digitalisation process
in Section 5.
4.1. Level of engagement with the model of
determinants
Statements, where the SMEs described some level of
engagement with the model of determinants, were coded
according to the 11 dependency themes (see Table 4). Of
the 414 unique statements, 147 statements fit the engage-
ment cluster as either expressions of low, medium, or high
level of engagement with the 11 dependency themes. 267
statements were grouped in the hindrance cluster, as the
statements either were a mismatch with the dependency
themes, or the statements expressed a specific lack of
activities related to the dependency themes.
4.1.1. Perceived benefits
Among the perceived benefits of digital transforma-
tion expressed by the companies were cost reduction,
automatic data projection and data flow, leading to less
employee stress. Additionally, increased data communi-
cation was understood as generating potential for quicker
reactions to errors, while digital tools were expected to
improve delivery and consistency of supply. Additive
manufacturing was seen as an area of interest explored
through external collaboration and company visits. Per-
ceived benefits of smart technologies were also influenced
by previous experiences with similar technology. Virtual
reality was interesting too from a remote maintenance
perspective. The SMEs often use vague terms related to
specific technologies with few examples of actual value
added.
8. ‘Great expectations that automation improves produc-
tion, reduces cost price, increases competitiveness’; 4.
’Want to use digital tools to improve delivery and consis-
tency of supply’; 13. ‘We see a potential to quicker react
to production errors if our workstations could exchange
data between them [currently tech-islands]’; 18. ’We
are interested in the possibilities VR has within remote
maintenance’
The companies expressed a lot of uncertainties as well,
mainly a lack of understanding from both managers as
well as the shop-floor workers. The main topics where
they expressed lack of understanding were within data
and what value it may bring. A general lack of under-
standing of Industry 4.0 and related technologies persists,
which, in turn, makes it difficult to create strategies or to

--- [PAGE 11] ---
6594
A. K. HANSEN ET AL.
formulate a business case around digitalisation as there is
no clear understanding of what value can be created.
4.1.2. Financial resource availability, management
support, and strategic roadmapping for digitalisation:
Some but not all, express awareness that investments are
needed for digitalisation. The statements generally men-
tion that money is there or allocated for digitalisation
projects. However, the projects are not clearly defined.
Overall, there is a tendency for management support
within most of the companies, which was to be expected
as members of the management agreed to participate in
the research project about digitalisation.
29. ‘Our group supports our digitalisation efforts’; 16.
‘We think I4.0 should be a top-down process in the
organisation’; 3. ’Willingness towards digitalisation from
the board’
Only one company mentions the use of roadmaps
and use of ‘lighthouses’ to communicate strategy to the
employees. One other mentions a defined plan for an
isolated IT project involving a new ERP system.
13. ‘We communicate our strategies through ‘light-
houses”’; 23. ‘New ERP project initiated with defined
start/end date, team and processes to identify needs’
The areas where the SMEs express uncertainty are
related to producing a proper business case before the
allocation of financial means to support digitalisation
efforts. Management support is strong, however, some
still express a certain conservatism among management
and a considerable knowledge gap from the top manage-
ment down through the organisation. Strategic roadmap-
ping for digitalisation is where the biggest uncertainty
lies, where many express the lack of a digital strategy.
4.1.3. Employee qualifications
Employee qualification is mentioned, but on a very basic
level, e.g. ad hoc peer-to-peer training. Very few mention
external courses and planned training, e.g. one men-
tion of a separate management development track about
interface standards.
25. ‘We have a separate management development track
about interface standards and development processes’;
27. ‘We currently rely on an unstructured peer-to-peer
training process’; 3. ‘Hired external consultants to help
with ERP system but not how to involve employees’
The SMEs show a general understanding of which
competencies they need (or have identified they need).
Yet, few prioritise upskilling and training outside of
peer-to-peer on the floor and management level, hence
not moving in the direction of their established compe-
tence needs. The competencies they expressed a need for
included: data-flow management, how to structure data
(e.g. use of Power BI (business intelligence) and ERP data
integration), data analysis, IT knowledge, 3D modelling,
robot programming, programming above PLC level, and
digital product configuration.
4.1.4. Digitalisation maturity
The SMEs mentioned topics showcasing engagement
with the digitalisation maturity theme from the model
of determinants. Mostly their engagement consists of
IT systems such as ERP, Customer Relationship Man-
agement (CRM), Business Intelligence (BI), Warehouse
Management System (WMS) or the use of digital dash-
boards and digital tools, e.g. the use of 3D drawings
(Computer-Aided Design (CAD)) integrated into their
production processes.
1. ‘We use Navision ERP system, which is integrated with
our CAD program’ 30. ‘BI connected to ERP and used for
performance measurement and decision-making’
However, this is the theme that the companies tend
to struggle the most with, especially aspects surrounding
data collection and exploitation. In many instances, data
is collected but with no apparent use.
4.1.5. Corporate social responsibility, seamless
integration capability, and openness to change
Very little was revealed about the Corporate social
responsibility efforts of the SMEs. A few mention the
wish to maintain current employees, striking a balance
between OEE and surveillance and welcoming appren-
ticeships, which benefit both society and the SME.
8. ‘Wants to improve competitiveness, while maintaining
employees’
Overall a very low level of engagement with corpo-
rate social responsibility was portrayed. In addition, the
SMEs showed very little integration capability, meaning
very little available knowledge about and technology for
enabling horizontal and vertical integration. A few exam-
ples that could be fitted to the model of determinants
include the active use of cloud-based services and remote
monitoring of machines.
13. ‘In the process of migrating to Office 365 with cloud
services’ 1. ‘Two of our machines can be monitored and
controlled remotely’
Overall integration capability is an area where the
SMEs struggle most based on the scope of responses and
the portrayed low maturity level.
According to the companies, there was a general open-
ness towards new initiatives and technology. Nearly half
of the companies expressed that their workers displayed
a willingness to learn, and some even regularly make
digitalisation suggestions on their own initiative.

--- [PAGE 12] ---
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PRODUCTION RESEARCH
6595
31. ‘Employees are generally positive towards new sys-
tems/initiatives’ 22. ‘We have the right culture to test out
new initiatives’
4.1.6. Operations technology and cybersecurity
maturity
The SMEs tend to focus more on operations technology
such as robots and 3D printing compared to cybersecu-
rity, which only one statement touched upon
13. ‘3D printing currently used for bespoke fixtures in
production but not in products’ 30. ‘Milling and drilling
department is most advanced with auto-feeding robots,
semi-automated welding, three fully automatic robot
cells.’ 13. ‘Our board is actively supporting value-adding
technology, e.g. approved a big budget for cybersecurity’
Despite that many areas within smart manufactur-
ing are not in place, a big group of companies mention
their use of advanced operations technology, which indi-
cates that SMEs prioritise physical hardware solutions.
In contrast, most hindrances are mentioned within data
associated with operations technology.
4.1.7. Sub-conclusion
Through the statements and on-site company visits, the
SMEs show productive activities related to the determi-
nants for smart technology implementation. Especially
within management support, openness to change, oper-
ations technology maturity and, perhaps surprisingly,
financial resource availability. However, they are aware of
great challenges in perceived benefits, strategic roadmap-
ping for digitalisation, employees’ qualification, digital-
isation maturity, corporate social responsibility policy,
seamless integration capability and cybersecurity matu-
rity. Statements describing challenges in these latter areas
outweigh productive and active activities, and the major-
ity fall outside the high, medium, and low level of engage-
ment. This created the hindrance cluster, which is anal-
ysed in the next sections.
4.2. Foundational lack of content knowledge
The hindrance cluster was used to conduct an analy-
sis following the Gioia methodology (Gioia, Corley, and
Hamilton 2013) to make sense of the statements. The first
aggregate dimension, content knowledge, (see Figure 4)
describes the lack of understanding of industry 4.0 and
related technologies both from the management and
shop-floor level. This included knowledge surround-
ing data and integration. The aggregated dimension
describes areas where the companies need assistance in
gaining deeper knowledge and understanding to advance
their digital maturity, and thus describe what are impor-
tant topics within digitalisation. This is explained in three
second-order themes: lack of understanding, data han-
dling, and integration challenges.
4.2.1. Lack of understanding
The first theme contributing to the aggregated dimen-
sion called content knowledge is centred around a lack
of understanding of digital technologies and the over-
all concept of industry 4.0. This lack of understanding is
present both from managers and shop-floor employees.
10. ‘Our digitalisation agenda is not understood gen-
erally by employees’; 14. ‘Management is interested in
employee involvement because some have difficulties
understanding the purpose of digitalisation’; 12. ‘We
have overall goals but lack a plan and an understanding
of why they are important’
The uncertainty surrounding industry 4.0 makes it
difficult for the companies to understand what value a
given technology may provide. Most of the sample com-
panies also do not have any strategies or visions related
to digitalisation as they lack the knowledge to base their
direction on.
25. ‘We lack understanding of data analysis and what
value it can bring’; 12. ‘It’s difficult to define, which needs
digitalisation should fulfil’; 10. ‘It is hard to plan a strat-
egy when we don’t know which technological solutions
exists’
4.2.2. Data handling
The second theme under content knowledge relates to
the companies’ difficulties surrounding the use of data.
Here there are a variety of obstacles for the companies
related to low utilisation of the data that is currently being
collected in their production processes. Many of the com-
panies collect data in their current production processes,
yet the majority do not use the collected data. The data
quality is also currently a concern for the companies
e.g. they experience discrepancies between actual avail-
able stock and what is listed in their ERP system. Many
still rely on outdated and now unsupported ERP systems,
which have been tailored to their needs but now presents
an inflexible obstacle when looking towards newer digital
solutions to be implemented alongside the ERP. Addi-
tionally, the companies currently rely on many manual
processes, which they appear unable to overcome.
11. ‘We want to collect data but do not know for what’; 2.
‘We have historical data from our machines from the past
5 years but it has never been used’; 12. ‘We perceive our
current ERP system as a barrier to pursue potential new
solutions’; 27. ‘Warehouse data is there but often inaccu-
rate, which causes a mismatch between the system and
physical warehouse’; 15. ‘We have to manually handle an
order 5 times before it leaves the factory’; 29. ‘Employees
manually log order/product information. They manually
write directly on the product, which is not ideal’; 20. ‘We

--- [PAGE 13] ---
6596
A. K. HANSEN ET AL.
need a better data flow. Currently a lot of files are sent
manually’
4.2.3. Integration challenges
The third theme under knowledge acquisition contains
challenges related to system integration and how SMEs
struggle to establish effective connectivity between sys-
tems to enable such integration. The challenges are
related to their available equipment, which either is not
utilised fully or is outdated and inherent to their cur-
rent processes, which makes integration difficult. This
includes the many manual processes and tasks reliant on
craftmanship, which makes it hard to achieve a meaning-
ful integration.
31. ‘Servers collect data but are not connected/communi
cating’; 12. ‘Log data in multiple places due to lack of
integration’; 8. ‘Currently have a very basic and classic
setup with little connectivity. Working towards increased
partner integration’ 11. ‘Our customers are unwilling to
provide access/connectivity to our machines’; 26. ‘Our
machines are not connected. Difficult when a lot of
processes rely on craftmanship’; 31. ‘We currently print
every drawing for every order’
4.3. Foundational lack of meta-cognitive
knowledge
The second aggregate dimension captures the struggle
for the SMEs to work on digital transformation strategies
– that is, having clear plans for digitalisation includ-
ing business needs, change management, competence
requirements, and how to upskill or otherwise acquire the
needed competencies. The dimension captures the need
for competent management that positions the company
advantageously for future digital changes. Meta-cognitive
knowledge thus describes insights into how to learn and
awareness of the processes involved. It consists of two
themes: upskilling and competence needs and strategic
management capabilities.
4.3.1. Upskilling and competence needs
The companies are aware that they need different com-
petencies compared to what they currently have if they
are to advance with digitalisation efforts. This especially
materialises in competencies related to system integra-
tion and digital competencies related to data utilisa-
tion. Unsurprisingly, the SMEs are strong within classi-
cal operational competencies i.e. product-specific knowl-
edge and masters of their own area, but lack experience
with digital IT systems.
20. ‘We don’t have the competencies for creating power
BI apps or integration with customers ERP’; 8. ‘Our
workers have very basic IT competencies and only know
how to operate their specific machines’; 2. ‘We don’t
utilise the current equipment, which supports digitali-
sation optimally. It requires training in CAD-based soft-
ware and knowledge of data utilisation’; 19. ‘Do not know
the level of internal IT security’; 12. ‘We don’t have the
competencies for data-flow management’; 15. ‘On a jour-
ney from traditional craftmanship to digital modern fac-
tory’; 17. ’Our production is mainly practical and manual
with a majority of unskilled labour’
4.3.2. Strategic management capabilities
The companies show a high interest in the general oppor-
tunities that industry 4.0 may provide, however, the vast
majority do not have any strategy when it comes to dig-
ital technologies. The companies struggle with change
management, e.g. when introducing new initiatives.
19. ‘Technology roadmap is in place but lack a clear
IT strategy and roadmap’; 26. ‘We have management
support for digitalisation initiatives but lack a concrete
vision and strategy’ 2. ‘There’s no training strategy in
place’; 1. ‘We are interested, but have no concrete plan
for digitalisation’; 3. ‘We have a general direction but
no concrete digitalisation plan. We need more knowl-
edge’ 17. ‘We can’t send our employees through training
courses/education as it would halt the production’ 25.
‘We lack the structure and resources to drive a digitali-
sation process’
There are also decisions surrounding external factors
that managers need to navigate, e.g. when to rely on
building internal competencies or buy externally. The
labour market also affects decision-making around dig-
italisation as some companies experience that much-
needed courses are unavailable or certain competence
profiles are hard to find. One mentions a hard time keep-
ing their employees after they have gained new skills as
they seek new job opportunities elsewhere. Creating a
business case to justify investments in digital technology
is generally perceived as a challenge, yet a necessity.
30. ‘If the business case is clear, the money is there’; 11.
‘Difficult to create a business case around our solutions’
4.4. Implications for the model of determinants
Based on the company statements, the table of engage-
ment (Table 4) and the data structure in Figure 4), we
interpret the areas where companies face the biggest
hindrances. These are mapped in Figure 5. The high-
lighted hindrances are identified through both the dis-
tribution (high, medium, low) and the content of the
statements. We identify what can be considered a level
0, focusing on their lack of understanding of industry
4.0 concepts, low data handling and integration capabil-
ity (content knowledge), and strategic management capa-
bilities together with structured upskilling and compe-
tence development (meta-cognitive knowledge). With no

--- [PAGE 14] ---
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PRODUCTION RESEARCH
6597
Table 5. Supporting data used for each second order theme presented in the data structure.
Dimensions and themes
Illustrative statements
Content knowledge
Lack of understanding
12. ‘We have overall goals but lack a plan and an understanding of why they are important’
25. ‘A challenge to show eﬀects of the digital vision and formulate economical arguments’
10. ‘We have a certain awareness of I4.0 potentials but ﬁnd it diﬃcult to quantify’
29. ‘Diﬀerent opinions as to what is bringing value to the company’
12. ‘Diﬃcult to deﬁne the value of a [digital] solution’
10. ‘Our digitalisation agenda is not understood generally by employees’
14. ‘Management is interested in employee involvement because some have diﬃculties understanding the
purpose of digitalisation’
5. ‘There’s a lack of understanding of Industry 4.0’
19. ‘Lack of understanding/recognition of possibilities within industry 4.0’
12. ‘We lack knowledge and insight about opportunities’.
1. ‘lack knowledge about possibilities and use of digital solutions’
12. ‘It’s diﬃcult to deﬁne, which needs digitalisation should fulﬁl’
10. ‘Our digitalisation agenda is not understood generally by employees’
10. ‘It is hard to plan a strategy when we don’t know which technological solutions exists’
30. ‘there’s no agreement about how rapid change is needed’
10. ‘It is hard to obtain the right mindset in our employees. They do not want it [digitalisation]’
25. ‘We lack understanding of data analysis and what value it can bring’
Data handling
4. ‘Logistics planning is done with a gut-feel and not based around eﬃciency and data’
10. ‘We collect data but are still unclear about how to use it’
10. ‘We have dashboards, data collection, and a collaborative robot but don’t use big data, smart devices,
digital twin, cloud, or predictive maintenance’
2. ‘We have historical data from our machines from the past 5 years but it has never been used’
1. ‘Data is collected from machines and statistics are generated once every quarter, but we rarely learn from
the data’
15. ‘Gathers data but not the ‘right’ data’
22. ‘Currently have legacy data with diﬀerent data sources’
16. ‘Lacks ways to share data and from a single source’
27. ‘The quality and setup of master data is currently a central problem and relies on many manual processes’
27. ‘Warehouse data is there but often inaccurate, which causes a mismatch between the system and physical
warehouse’
3. ‘We experience discrepancies between our system data and actual available stock’
7. ‘Manual data entry of the same data happen multiple times’
5. ‘Lacks standardisation of our data’
18. ‘We are challenged on our master data’
2. ‘We do not really use our current ERP system’
3. ‘We have a clear plan for how to use our collected data but currently do not exploit data well’
13. ‘We lack visible KPI’s directed at the right people. Data is there but is not being used’
8. ‘Old ERP system tailored to processes – not ﬂexible’
19. ‘Functional but old ERP system (NAV 2009’
12. ‘We perceive our current ERP system as a barrier to pursue potential new solutions’
15. ‘We have to manually handle an order 5 times before it leaves the factory’
22. ‘We lack automatic data-gathering. A lot is done manually today’
2. ‘Recurring human errors due to many manual processes and the same numbers/dimensions are manually
written down multiple times’
Integration challenges
10. ‘We have islands of automation (no automated logistics and quality control)’
11. ‘We have no contact/connectivity in our globally distributed machines’
8. ‘Currently have a very basic and classic setup with little connectivity. Working towards increased
partner integration’
21. ‘Skilled central IT team but the local integration remains low’
12. ‘We lack system integration with our ERP system, e.g. excel sheets and e-control’
12. ‘Log data in multiple places due to lack of integration’
11. ‘Our customers are unwilling to provide access/connectivity to our machines’
23. ‘Some suppliers won’t join an open information system’
26. ‘Our machines are not connected. Diﬃcult when a lot of processes rely on craftmanship’
Meta-cognitive knowledge
Upskillingand competence needs
8. ‘Our workers have very basic IT competences and only knows how to operate their speciﬁc machines’.
27. ‘We lack communication between systems. Currently processes are very dependent on individuals and not
everyone knows the same’
8. ‘Our workers have very basic IT competences and only knows how to operate their speciﬁc machines’.
8. ‘No competence or experience with digitalisation and robotics’
5. ‘We don’t possess the competences to create a product conﬁgurator by ourselves’
2. ‘We don’t utilise the current equipment, which support digitalisation, optimally. It requires training in
CAD-based software and knowledge of data utilisation’
19. ‘Do not know the level of internal IT security’
28. ‘Lacks 3D printing skills to be used in production processes’
8. ‘Competences and experience within classical production
(continued)

--- [PAGE 15] ---
6598
A. K. HANSEN ET AL.
Table 5. Continued.
Dimensions and themes
Illustrative statements
Strategic management capabilities
19. ‘Technology roadmap is in place but lack a clear IT strategy and roadmap’
19. ‘Need uniform direction towards a goal instead of isolated islands of improvements’
5. ‘We lack a digital strategy and knowledge sharing between projects happen too late’.
18. ‘We need change management for digital initiatives’
12. ‘We have overall goals but lack a plan and an understanding of why they are important’
26. ‘We have management support for digitalisation initiatives but lack a concrete vision and strategy’
26. ‘Some departments deﬁne their own work goals but a general strategy is missing’
31. ‘We don’t have a clear digitalisation strategy’
6. ‘Hard to deﬁne end-goal [about digitalisation]’
19. ‘Perceives a gap from top management and down through the organisation’
17. ‘If it ain’t broke, don’t ﬁx it. Management doesn’t have much focus on digitalisation but they are curious.’
30. ‘If the business case is clear, the money is there’
11. ‘Diﬃcult to create a business case around our solutions’
2. ‘We lack the resources to implement the solutions that we want’
25. ‘We lack the structure and resources to drive a digitalisation process’
8. ‘Changing the mindset towards digitalisation is a challenge.’
8. ‘Experiences resistance towards new initiatives in the organisation’
17. ‘Recently made a turnaround and now cautious to change something that works as-is’
4. ‘We experience resistance from the older staﬀwhen introducing something new. They don’t like being
dictated on how to do their jobs’
4. ‘ Employees have a limited/basic digital knowledge and feel safe with what they already know. Change is
diﬃcult
21. ‘We want to improve our operators’ use of data, which is currently diﬃcult as some do not trust the existing
data’
Figure 5. New model of determinants, where observed hindrances are highlighted.
support, the companies will struggle to transform effec-
tively, as described in the model of determinants shown
in Figure 5. The highlighted themes show that SMEs
need support in vital steps throughout the entire journey
towards smart manufacturing technology.
5. Discussion
Firstly, the findings of our study tie into a growing body
of research that identifies the main barriers to industry
4.0 adoption (Masood and Sonntag 2020; Møller 2019;
Stentoft et al. 2021), and literature, which emphasises
greater focus on the importance of the humans involved
alongside digital technologies (Kaasinen et al. 2020;
Kadir and Broberg 2021; Rangraz and Pareto 2021; Xu
et al. 2021). The SMEs in our sample generally experience
that their employees show a high willingness to learn,
and at the same time the organisation is not clear on
what they want to achieve, nor have they prepared their
workers for the change initiatives, e.g. by presenting a
clear vision and roadmap for planned activities and tar-
gets to re-design their work systems considering human
factors, as suggested by Kadir and Broberg (2021). Aware-
ness and guidance among management are needed for
companies to elevate the support from the shop-floor.
Additionally, openness towards industry 4.0 (Cugno,
Castagnoli, and Büchi 2021) and employee involvement
(Tortorella et al. 2021) heavily influences how well enter-
prises manage to adopt industry 4.0 technologies. To
exploit this openness to industry 4.0, it requires both
a level of awareness towards available technologies and
on how to transform that into perceived value in the

--- [PAGE 16] ---
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PRODUCTION RESEARCH
6599
organisation – including attention to competencies and
employee qualification. This falls well in line with previ-
ous results and models describing digital transformation
(Cugno, Castagnoli, and Büchi 2021; Ghobakhloo 2020;
Mittal et al. 2020). However, it appears that it is not possi-
ble for small companies to do effectively without external
support (Hansen and Hansen 2023; Moeuf et al. 2020).
In many ways, digital transformation can be viewed
as a learning process. Prior knowledge has previously
been identified as the biggest influencing factor on learn-
ing outcome (Dochy, de Rijdt, and Dyck 2002). Dochy
et al. summarise key aspects that make up the concept
of prior knowledge. Here, content knowledge and meta-
cognitive knowledge are the two main pillars, where
content knowledge relates to domain specific knowledge,
where meta-cognitive knowledge is more reflective and
deals with the understanding of the learning processes
related to tasks, the self, and strategic processes, accord-
ing to Dochy, de Rijdt, and Dyck (2002), who further
conclude that, while prior knowledge is a key factor to
reap the benefits, it also highly depends on the facilita-
tion of learning (Ibid.). Aligning and facilitating a path
for the companies may therefore profoundly affect their
digital maturity. If companies do not manage to expand
on relevant prior knowledge, one risks getting caught
in knowledge inertia. Knowledge inertia locks compa-
nies into a finite set of processes and knowledge defined
by past experience (Liao, Fei, and Liu 2008). If no new
knowledge is introduced to break their existing knowl-
edge inertia, companies will continue on the path deter-
mined by knowledge and skills untenable to adopting
smart technologies.
This is revealed in the interaction between the con-
tent knowledge dimension, i.e. knowledge about specific
smart technologies and their related processes, and the
meta-cognitive knowledge dimension, in which compa-
nies express serious uncertainty about how best to move
forward and strategically plan their digitalisation direc-
tion. Especially, how to identify the right competencies,
how to obtain new knowledge and develop competen-
cies, while being confident in the business case. Evidence
of the SMEs’ weak knowledge foundation of industry 4.0
appears to send ripples through the ideal path defined by
Ghobakhloo (2020), which we highlight in Figure 5 as
observed hindrances (i.e. evidence of knowledge inertia).
Thus, the addition of a ‘Level 0’ to the model of deter-
minants provides a better starting point and knowledge
foundation for companies to engage with the dependency
themes than what is currently observed. This leads to our
first proposition:
Proposition 1: Challenges towards digitalisation experi-
enced by SMEs can be mitigated by an increased focus
on both their understanding of content knowledge and
meta-cognitive knowledge related to industry 4.0. Con-
tent knowledge relates heavily to the general conceptual
understanding of industry 4.0, and specifically, value cre-
ation through data exploitation methods and integration
capabilities. Meta-cognitive knowledge encompasses how
to work strategically with digital technologies and how to
target competence development early to increase digitali-
sation capability.
Secondly, our findings suggest a big deficiency
in strategic management, beyond attention directed
towards industry 4.0, which aligns with barriers identi-
fied by Kadir and Broberg (2021); Møller (2019); Stentoft
et al. (2021), and Lassen et al. (2023). An example of
strategic competencies can be found within Saabye, Kris-
tensen, and Wæhrens (2022). They approached indus-
try 4.0 adoption from an action learning perspective
and focused on developing a learning to learn capa-
bility in an organisation. They emphasised the role of
management and broad involvement of people in the
organisation beyond cost reduction (digitalisation) and
towards organisational capabilities (digital transforma-
tion). Knowledge about industry 4.0 has to be present,
and managers should adopt a role as learning facilita-
tors instead of solely relying on acquiring best practice
knowledge about industry 4.0, while fostering a support-
ive learning environment that encourages questions and
helps create a psychologically safe environment (Saabye,
Kristensen, and Wæhrens 2022). Likewise, Ghobakhloo
and Fathi (2020) reported a significant reduction in
defect rates after introducing focused management prac-
tices in an SME. They emphasised the importance of
managers supporting organisational changes, especially
concerning IT knowledge, in-house and external train-
ing related to smart technology to reduce uncertainty,
and increase participation in developing the right solu-
tions for the SME (Ghobakhloo and Fathi 2020). Our
updated model of determinants depicted in Figure 5
offers a scaffold for companies to strategically approach
industry 4.0, and in a human-centric manner, by focus-
ing on the enablers of acquiring smart manufacturing
technology – an operational direction and scaffold absent
from the technical reference architecture models from
Table 1. This leads to our second proposition:
Proposition 2: A lack of foundational prior knowledge
leads to knowledge inertia, which explains lack of progress
regarding digitalisation observed in manufacturing SMEs.
Lastly, on ways to combat knowledge inertia, Liao,
Fei, and Liu (2008) suggest that companies should
actively encourage new methods and ideas, which have

--- [PAGE 17] ---
6600
A. K. HANSEN ET AL.
been shown to form through governance development
and support programs i.e. interactive research (Ellström
et al. 2020) or engaged scholarship (Van De Ven and
Johnson 2006).
Over the course of three years, we engaged multiple
representatives from each SME in four engagements last-
ing three-four months each, providing them material on
industry 4.0 and hands-on experience with smart man-
ufacturing technologies to create a common language
and inspire strategic thinking related to industry 4.0
through digital vision and maturity workshops. Despite
receiving such initial help, the SMEs struggled to inde-
pendently focus on the smart technology dependency
themes and would benefit from close support and facil-
itation suitable to their current situation, as shown by
Saabye, Kristensen, and Wæhrens (2022), especially in
the areas highlighted in the model of determinants, sup-
ported by our aggregate dimensions and extant literature
(see Figure 5). They have yet to reach the event horizon
(i.e. the point of no return), where they leave knowl-
edge inertia behind and become self-sufficient enough
to identify value-adding technology, manage competence
development and pursue digital transformation towards
industry 4.0. Competence development highly relies on
the management and their awareness about which com-
petencies are relevant and that managers understand the
importance of providing the right environment to learn
(Saabye, Kristensen, and Wæhrens 2022). Thus, man-
agers also need knowledge and competencies about how
to lead a digital transformation (Hecklau et al. 2016; Shet
and Pereira 2021), e.g. competencies within project lead-
ership, design thinking, collaborative mindset, and data
analytics, inter alia (Shet and Pereira 2021). Finding a
suitable path to increased digitalisation for SMEs may
then be realised through competent facilitation, sparring,
and a focus on maturing the prior knowledge in level 0.
This leads to our third proposition:
Proposition3: Technology investment alone is not enough
to succeed with digitalisation. A supportive scaffold to help
with the facilitation of digitalisation initiatives is needed
to escape the knowledge inertia present in SMEs and help
guide strategies for competence development in parallel
with operational technology implementation.
Such support could arrive from consortia to help
provide detailed documentation on technical reference
architectures while making training material easily acces-
sible and up to date for companies (Nakagawa et al. 2021).
Ellström et al. (2020) report promising results from a type
of consortium that acts as an intermediary knowledge
creation centre and a broker between practitioners and
researchers.
Ten years on from the initial conceptualisation of
industry 4.0, the importance of human-centred solutions
and employee involvement are becoming evident, e.g.
as shown in Kaasinen et al. (2020) and Rangraz and
Pareto (2021), and in the thinking around industry 5.0
(Breque, Nul, and Petridis 2021; Xu et al. 2021). SMEs
have significant hurdles when it comes to digitalisation,
yet great opportunities as their culture and smaller size
often afford greater employee involvement and collabo-
ration (Horváth and Szabó 2019). If they can overcome
their technical hurdles and keep their inclusive culture,
they are on a path towards industry 5.0 – a human-
centric, sustainable, and resilient production.
5.1. Research perspectives
Future research directions should include in-depth case
studies of SMEs who have managed to overcome the
challenges outlined in this paper to obtain a deeper
knowledge of the proposed dimensions, approaches, and
barriers (Flyvbjerg 2006). We call for more research
on how to effectively create content knowledge and
meta-cognitive knowledge to support competencies for
smart manufacturing both on the management and
shop-floor levels. Additionally, exemplary cases could
be used to verify propositions and the effect of pro-
viding a proper knowledge foundation on digitalisation
progress. While we found that the main barriers for
SMEs were other ones than commonly known barri-
ers such as financial and managerial support, openness
to change, and operations technology maturity, differ-
ent patterns may emerge in other cultural contexts and
economies compared to Denmark. This study was made
possible through the Innovation Factory North research
program, which was an opportunity for SMEs with lim-
ited human and financial resources to get started with
digital transformation while providing valuable insights
for research. More research is needed to determine the
most effective setups combining industry and academia
– not only to raise awareness of digital transforma-
tion but also to learn more about which human and
organisational factors both hinder and enable digital
transformation.
6. Conclusion
The industry 4.0 paradigm still captures the attention
of manufacturing and small- and medium-sized enter-
prises (SMEs) are eager to get on board. However, it
appears difficult for them to successfully perform a digital
transformation in line with the industry 4.0 vision.
Our study, based on a sample of 30 SMEs, reveals that
important determinants for digitalisation are overlooked,

--- [PAGE 18] ---
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PRODUCTION RESEARCH
6601
often leading back to an experienced lack of knowl-
edge of opportunities and competencies. SMEs struggle
across all levels of the original model of determinants
for smart technology adoption. We suggest that a level 0
determinant stage exists that should serve to mature the
companies and allow them to engage effectively with the
levels identified by Ghobakhloo (2020). Level 0 should
target content knowledge related to general industry 4.0
concepts, opportunities through specific data handling
methods, and integration between digital systems. Addi-
tionally, level 0 should target meta-cognitive knowledge
related to strategic management of digital technologies
and reflections on how to identify and operationalise
competence development strategically moving forwards.
This ties into what is known about prior knowledge
(Dochy, de Rijdt, and Dyck 2002) and knowledge iner-
tia (Liao, Fei, and Liu 2008): SMEs need to expand
and leverage existing knowledge to advance digitalisation
while actively acquiring new knowledge to avoid hinder-
ing their own innovation. By expanding Ghobakhloo’s
(2020) model, our study highlights the crucial role
of a determinant level 0 in addressing the knowledge
gap for SMEs aiming to adopt industry 4.0 production
systems.
The addition of a level 0 in the model of determinants
forces researchers to consider how a suitable knowl-
edge foundation can be fostered in manufacturing enter-
prises, emphasising the human-centred aspects equally
(if not higher) than technology-driven aspects. This cor-
responds with the findings from Estensoro et al. (2022),
who emphasise that resources have to be present as
pre-conditions towards industry 4.0. Additionally, Mittal
et al. (2018) investigated existing maturity and readi-
ness assessment models for industry 4.0 through a struc-
tured literature review and found that such models were
often more suitable for larger multinational enterprises.
The models start on a level already too advanced for
SMEs and there is a need for a level 0, which cor-
responds more closely to the reality of SMEs (Mittal
et al. 2018). In this paper, we have specified which
knowledge areas are especially important to act as indus-
try 4.0 pre-conditions (i.e. level 0) for SMEs based on
empirical evidence of 30 SMEs. However, where Mittal
et al. (2020) find the need for SMEs to develop aware-
ness of smart manufacturing after having identified man-
ufacturing data, we argue that awareness needs to be
created earlier in the process as our sample of SMEs
expressed great uncertainty in both data utilisation and
integration capabilities, making it difficult for them to
make informed decisions surrounding production data.
Additionally, our results back up the recommendation
by Ellström et al. (2020); Estensoro et al. (2022), and
Saabye, Kristensen, and Wæhrens (2022) for companies
to collaborate with policymakers, and experts (or man-
agers) as facilitators through different development stages
and close prolonged engagements.
This study makes four key contributions, which mate-
rialise in three propositions and an expanded model of
determinants for smart technology adoption. In summa-
tion, the propositions state that:
(1) SMEs need a knowledge starting point before tack-
ling later stages towards digitalisation: this includes
content knowledge (what) and meta-cognitive knowl-
edge (how).
(2) A lack of foundational prior knowledge leads to
knowledge inertia, which explains lack of progress
regarding digitalisation observed in manufacturing
SMEs.
(3) Technology investments are not enough for digitali-
sation. Competence development strategies should
be developed in parallel with operational technol-
ogy implementation, preferably through structured
facilitation (e.g. a scaffolding approach.
Practically, managers in manufacturing enterprises
can utilise the model of determinants as a process guide
for structuring their digitalisation efforts, ensuring that
crucial aspects like competence development are not
overlooked. Our findings underline the importance of
closer collaboration between manufacturing SMEs and
supportive digitalisation programs, which can facilitate
knowledge creation. This necessitates proactive involve-
ment from policymakers in initiating and incentivising
such engagements.
Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).
Funding
This work received funding from the European Regional Devel-
opment fund (ERDF).
Note
1. The authors note that we use the term industry 4.0 and
smart manufacturing interchangeably throughout the arti-
cle. In our view, the meaning of the two terms generally
refers to the same topic and may help reach a broader
audience by doing so.
Disclosure and data availability statement
The authors declare no potential conflicts of interest. The
data supporting this study’s findings are available from

--- [PAGE 19] ---
6602
A. K. HANSEN ET AL.
the corresponding author, Andreas Kornmaaler Hansen,
upon reasonable request.
Notes on contributors
Andreas Kornmaaler Hansen is a PhD fel-
low at the University of Aalborg, Den-
mark, where he received both his BSc. and
MSc. in engineering psychology in 2017
and 2019 respectively. He focuses mainly
on small and medium-sized companies.
His research interests include human-
centric digital transformation of manufac-
turing companies, competence development, Industry 4.0/5.0,
and human-robot interaction.
Dr. Lasse Christiansen is a Postdoc at Aal-
borg University, Denmark, Department of
Materials and Production and a Docent
at the University College of Northern
Denmark. Lasse performs research within
the areas of digital transformation and
upskilling with a focus on enterprises, the
workforce, and digital technologies. He
has also published several academic books on such topics. He
received his PhD in material science and uses his technological
background to collaborate with companies and manufacturing
professionals in his research.
Dr. Astrid Heidemann Lassen is Associate
Professor in Operations and Innovation
Management at Aalborg University, Den-
mark, Department of Materials and Pro-
duction. Astrid is Head of Section in Pro-
duction and Vice Head of Department.
Since 2015 she has been Honorary Visiting
Professor at the Unit for Innovation and
Entrepreneurship at University of Gothenburg, Sweden. Astrid
is the author/co-author of 100+ international journal and con-
ference articles on the topics of digital transformation, innova-
tion management, and knowledge intensive entrepreneurship.
She has also published several academic books on such topics.
Her research focus is in particular on the process of develop-
ing organizational capabilities for innovation and digital trans-
formation in the context of both established companies and
knowledge intensive entrepreneurial ventures.
ORCID
Andreas Kornmaaler Hansen
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-
2128-3172
Lasse Christiansen
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-1771-3934
Astrid Heidemann Lassen
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-8953-
7861
References
Ananiadou, Katerina, and Magdalean Claro. 2009. 21st Cen-
tury Skills and Competences for New Millennium Learners in
OECD Countries. Technical Report 41. OECD.
Antonino, Pablo Oliveira, Frank Schnicke, Zai Zhang, and
Thomas Kuhn. 2019. “Blueprints for Architecture Drivers
and Architecture Solutions for Industry 4.0 Shopfloor Appli-
cations.” In Proceedings of the 13th European Conference
on Software Architecture – Volume 2, ECSA ’19, 261–268,
New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3344948.3344971.
Belinski, Ricardo, Adriana M M Peixe, Guilherme F Fred-
erico, and Jose Arturo Garza-reyes. 2020. “Organizational
Learning and Industry 4. 0 : Findings From a Sys-
tematic Literature Review and Research Agenda.” Bench-
marking: An International Journal 27 (8): 2435–2457.
https://doi.org/10.1108/BIJ-04-2020-0158.
Breque, M, L. D.e Nul, and A Petridis. 2021. Industry 5.0:
Towards a Sustainable, Human-centric and Resilient Euro-
pean Industry. Luxembourg, LU: European Commission,
Directorate-General for Research and Innovation.
Buer, Sven-Vegard, Jo Wessel Strandhagen, Marco Semini, and
Jan Ola Strandhagen. 2020. “The Digitalization of Manu-
facturing: Investigating the Impact of Production Environ-
ment and Company Size.” Journal of Manufacturing Tech-
nology Management 32 (3): 621–645. Accessed 2023-03-02.
https://doi.org/10.1108/JMTM-05-2019-0174/full/html.
Capestro, Mauro, and Steffen Kinkel. 2020. “Industry 4.0
and Knowledge Management: A Review of Empirical
Studies.” In Knowledge Management and Industry 4.0:
New Paradigms for Value Creation, edited by Marco Bet-
tiol, Eleonora Di Maria, and Stefano Micelli, Knowledge
Management and Organizational Learning, 19–52. Cham:
Springer International Publishing. Accessed 2022-07-04.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-43589-9_2.
Cirillo, Valeria, Lucrezia Fanti, Andrea Mina, and Andrea Ricci.
2023. “The Adoption of Digital Technologies: Investment,
Skills, Work Organisation.” Structural Change and Economic
Dynamics66:89–105. Accessed 2023-08-02. https://linking
hub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0954349X23000577. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.strueco.2023.04.011.
Colli, M., U. Berger, M. Bockholt, O. Madsen, C. Møller,
and B. Vejrum Wæhrens. 2019. “A Maturity Assessment
Approach for Conceiving Context-specific Roadmaps in the
Industry 4.0 Era.” Annual Reviews in Control 48:165–177.
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S136757
8819300409.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.arcontrol.2019.06.
001.
Collins, Allan, and Manu Kapur. 2014. “Cognitive Appren-
ticeship.” In The Cambridge Handbook of the Learning
Sciences, edited by R. Keith Sawyer, 2nd ed., Cambridge
Handbooks in Psychology, 109–127. Cambridge University
Press.
Cugno, Monica, Rebecca Castagnoli, and Giacomo Büchi.
2021. “Openness to Industry 4.0 and Performance: The
Impact of Barriers and Incentives.” Technological Forecast-
ing and Social Change168:120756. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
techfore.2021.120756.
Dochy, Filip, Catherine de Rijdt, and Walter Dyck. 2002. “Cog-
nitive Prerequisites and Learning: How Far Have We Pro-
gressed Since Bloom? Implications for Educational Practice
and Teaching.” Active Learning in Higher Education 3 (3):
265–284. https://doi.org/10.1177/1469787402003003006.
Ellström, Per-Erik, Mattias Elg, Andreas Wallo, Martina
Berglund, and Henrik Kock. 2020. “Interactive Research:
Concepts, Contributions and Challenges.” Journal of Man-
ufacturing Technology Management 31 (8): 1517–1537.
https://doi.org/10.1108/JMTM-09-2018-0304.

--- [PAGE 20] ---
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PRODUCTION RESEARCH
6603
Estensoro, Miren, Miren Larrea, Julian M. Müller, and Eduardo
Sisti. 2022. “A Resource-based View on SMEs Regarding the
Transition to More Sophisticated Stages of Industry 4.0.”
European Management Journal40 (5): 778–792. Accessed
2023-03-02.
https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/
S0263237321001444.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.emj.2021.
10.001.
European Commission, 2003. “Commission Recommendation
of 6 May 2003 concerning the definition of micro, small and
medium-sized enterprises.” Accessed 2023-04-12.
Fareri, Silvia, Gualtiero Fantoni, Filippo Chiarello, Elena Coli,
and Anna Binda. 2020. “Estimating Industry 4.0 Impact
on Job Profiles and Skills Using Text Mining.” Computers
in Industry 118:103222. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compind.
2020.103222.
Flores, Emmanuel, Xun Xu, and Yuqian Lu. 2020. “Human
Capital 4.0: a Workforce Competence Typology for Indus-
try 4.0.” Journal of Manufacturing Technology Management
31 (4): 687–703. https://doi.org/10.1108/JMTM-08-2019-
0309.
Flyvbjerg, Bent. 2006. “Five Misunderstandings About Case-
study Research.” Qualitative Inquiry 12 (2): 219–245.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1077800405284363.
Ghobakhloo, Morteza. 2020. “Determinants of Information
and Digital Technology Implementation for Smart Man-
ufacturing.” International Journal of Production Research
58 (8): 2384–2405. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2019.
1630775.
Ghobakhloo, Morteza, and Ng Tan Ching. 2019. “Adoption
of Digital Technologies of Smart Manufacturing in SMEs.”
Journal of Industrial Information Integration 16:100107.
Accessed
2023-08-07.
https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S2452414X19300020. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.jii.2019.100107.
Ghobakhloo, Morteza, and Masood Fathi. 2020. “Corporate
Survival in Industry 4.0 Era: the Enabling Role of Lean-
digitized Manufacturing.” Journal of Manufacturing Tech-
nology Management 31 (1): 1–30. https://doi.org/10.1108/
JMTM-11-2018-0417.
Gioia, Dennis A, and Kumar Chittipeddi. 1991. “Sensemak-
ing and Sensegiving in Strategic Change Initiation.” Strate-
gic Management Journal 12 (6): 433–448. https://doi.org/10.
1002/smj.v12:6.
Gioia, Dennis A, Kevin G Corley, and Aimee L Hamilton. 2013.
“Seeking Qualitative Rigor in Inductive Research: Notes on
the Gioia Methodology.” Organizational Research Methods
16 (1): 15–31. https://doi.org/10.1177/1094428112452151.
Gorgels, Stefan, Priem Maximilian, Blagoeva Tsvetelina, Mar-
tinelle Agnèss, and Milanesi Giulio, European Commission.
2022. Annual report on European SMEs 2021/2022 : SMEs
and environmental sustainability. Publications Office of the
European Union.
Grosse, Eric H., Fabio Sgarbossa, Cecilia Berlin, and W.
Patrick Neumann. 2023. “Human-centric Production and
Logistics System Design and Management: Transitioning
From Industry 4.0 to Industry 5.0.” International Jour-
nal of Production Research 61 (22): 7749–7759. Pub-
lisher: Taylor & Francis _eprint: Accessed 2023-10-19.
https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2023.2246783.
Hankel, Martin, and Bosch Rexroth. 2015. The reference archi-
tectural model industrie 4.0 (RAMI 4.0). Technical Report 1.
ZVEI. Accessed 2023-06-06.
Hansen, Svend Aage, and Poul Kyvsgaard Hansen. 2023.
“Differences Between Small and Medium Sized Compa-
nies When Realizing Smart Production – Experiences from
Northwest Smart Production Program in Denmark.” In
The Future of Smart Production for SMEs: A Methodologi-
cal and Practical Approach Towards Digitalization in SMEs,
edited by Ole Madsen, Ulrich Berger, Charles Møller, Astrid
Heidemann Lassen, Brian Vejrum Waehrens, and Casper
Schou, 101–111. Cham: Springer International Publish-
ing. Accessed 2023-10-19. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
031-15428-7_9.
Hecklau, Fabian, Mila Galeitzke, Sebastian Flachs, and Hol-
ger Kohl. 2016. “Holistic Approach for Human Resource
Management in Industry 4.0.” Procedia CIRP 54:1–6.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2016.05.102.
Horváth, Dóra, and Roland Zs. Szabó. 2019. “Driving Forces
and Barriers of Industry 4.0: Do Multinational and Small
and Medium-sized Companies Have Equal Opportunities?”
Technological Forecasting and Social Change 146: 119–132.
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0040162518315737.
IBM, 2017. “Industry 4.0 reference architecture.” Accessed
2023-05-04. https://www.ibm.com/cloud/architecture/archi
tectures/industry-40/reference-architecture.
IVCI, 2018. IVRA Next: Strategic implementation framework
of industrial value chain for connected industries. Technical
Report. Industrial Value Chain Initiative. Accessed 2023-
05-03. https://iv-i.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/IVRA-
Next_en.pdf.
Jerman, Andrej, Mirjana Pejić Bach, and Andrej Berton-
celj. 2018. “A Bibliometric and Topic Analysis on Future
Competences At Smart Factories.” Machines 6 (3): 1–13.
https://doi.org/10.3390/machines6030041.
Kaasinen, Eija, Franziska Schmalfuß, Cemalettin Özturk,
Susanna Aromaa, Menouer Boubekeur, Juhani Heilala, and
Päivi Heikkilä, et al. 2020. “Empowering and engaging
industrial workers with Operator 4.0 solutions.” Comput-
ers and Industrial Engineering 139 (January 2019). Publisher:
Elsevier.
Kadir, Bzhwen A., and Ole Broberg. 2021. “Human-centered
Design of Work Systems in the Transition to Industry 4.0.”
Applied Ergonomics 92:103334. https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0003687020302829.
https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.apergo.2020.103334.
Kagermann, Henning, Wolfgang Wahlster, Johannes Helbig,
and Ariane Hellinger. 2013. Recommendations for Imple-
menting the Strategic Initiative Industrie 4.0: Final Report
of the Industrie 4.0 Working Group. Germany: Acatech-
National Academy of Science and Engineering.
Kamble, Sachin S., Angappa Gunasekaran, and Rohit Sharma.
2018. “Analysis of the Driving and Dependence Power
of Barriers to Adopt Industry 4.0 in Indian Manu-
facturing Industry.” Computers in Industry 101:107–119.
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0166361
518301453. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compind.2018.06.004.
Kassner, Laura, Christoph Gröger, Jan Königsberger, Eva Hoos,
Cornelia Kiefer, Christian Weber, Stefan Silcher, and Bern-
hard Mitschang. 2017. “The Stuttgart IT Architecture for
Manufacturing.” In Enterprise Information Systems, edited
by Slimane Hammoudi, Leszek A. Maciaszek, Michele M.
Missikoff, Olivier Camp, and José Cordeiro, Cham, 53–80.
Springer International Publishing.

--- [PAGE 21] ---
6604
A. K. HANSEN ET AL.
Ketokivi, Mikko, and Thomas Choi. 2014. “Renaissance of
Case Research As a Scientific Method.” Journal of Operations
Management 32 (5): 232–240. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jom.
2014.03.004.
Kipper, Liane Mahlmann, Sandra Iepsen, Ana Julia Dal Forno,
Rejane Frozza, Leonardo Furstenau, Jéssica Agnes, and
Danielli Cossul. 2021. “Scientific Mapping to Identify Com-
petencies Required by Industry 4.0.” Technology in Society
64:101454. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techsoc.2020.101454.
Kusiak, Andrew. 2018. “Smart Manufacturing.” International
Journal of Production Research 56 (1-2): 508–517. https://
doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2017.1351644.
Larsen, Maria Stoettrup Schioenning, Mats Magnusson, and
Astrid Heidemann Lassen. 2022. “Industry 4.0 Holds a
Great Potential for Manufacturers, So Why haven’t They
Started?” In Towards Sustainable Customization: Bridging
Smart Products and Manufacturing Systems, edited by Ann-
Louise Andersen, Rasmus Andersen, Thomas Ditlev Bru-
noe, Maria Stoettrup Schioenning Larsen, Kjeld Nielsen,
Alessia Napoleone, and Stefan Kjeldgaard, Cham, 721–729.
Springer International Publishing.
Lassen, Astrid Heidemann, Andreas Kornmaaler Hansen,
Daniel Grud Hellerup Sørensen, and Maria Stoettrup
Schioenning Larsen. 2023. “Labour 4.0: How is the Work-
force Prepared for the Future of Manufacturing Industries?”
In The Future of Smart Production for SMEs: A Methodolog-
ical and Practical Approach Towards Digitalization in SMEs,
edited by Ole Madsen, Ulrich Berger, Charles Møller, Astrid
Heidemann Lassen, Brian Vejrum Waehrens, and Casper
Schou, 391–403. Cham: Springer International Publishing.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-15428-7_36.
Lassen, Astrid Heidemann, and Brian Vejrum Waehrens. 2021.
“Labour 4.0: Developing Competences for Smart Produc-
tion.” Journal of Global Operations and Strategic Sourcing 14
(4): 659–679. https://doi.org/10.1108/JGOSS-11-2019-0064.
Lee, Jay, Behrad Bagheri, and Hung-An Kao. 2015. “A
Cyber-Physical Systems Architecture for Industry 4.0-based
Manufacturing Systems.” Manufacturing Letters 3:18–23.
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S22138
4631400025X. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mfglet.2014.12.001.
Liao, Shu-hsien, Wu-Chen Fei, and Chih-Tang Liu. 2008.
“Relationships Between Knowledge Inertia, Organizational
Learning and Organization Innovation.” Technovation 28
(4): 183–195. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/arti
cle/pii/S0166497207001502.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tech
novation.2007.11.005.
Liboni, Lara Bartocci, Luciana Oranges Cezarino, Charbel
José Chiappetta Jabbour, Bruno Garcia Oliveira, and Nel-
son Oliveira Stefanelli. 2019. “Smart Industry and the Path-
ways to HRM 4.0: Implications for SCM.” Supply Chain
Management: An International Journal 24 (1): 124–146.
https://doi.org/10.1108/SCM-03-2018-0150.
Lin, Shi-Wan, Eric Simmon, Daniel Young, Bradford Miller,
Jasques Durand, Graham Bleakly, Amine Chigani, et al.
2022. The industrial internet reference architecture: An
industry IoT consortium foundational document (Version
1.10). Technical Report V1.10. Industry IoT Consortium
(IIC).
Lundgren, Camilla, Cecilia Berlin, Anders Skoogh, and Anders
Källström. 2022. “How industrial maintenance managers
perceive socio-technical changes in leadership in the Indus-
try 4.0 context.” International Journal of Production Research
1–20. Accessed 2023-01-05. https://doi.org/10.1080/0020
7543.2022.2101031.
Mahmood, Kashif, Tauno Otto, Jesper H Kristensen, Astrid
Heidemann Lassen, Thomas D Brunoe, Casper Schou, Lasse
Christiansen, and Esben Skov Laursen. 2021. “Analysis of
Industry 4.0 Capabilities: A Perspective of Educational Insti-
tutions and Needs of Industry.” In Towards Sustainable Cus-
tomization: Bridging Smart Products and Manufacturing Sys-
tems, 887–894. Springer.
Masood, Tariq, and Paul Sonntag. 2020. “Industry 4.0: Adop-
tion Challenges and Benefits for SMEs.” Computers in Indus-
try121:103261. Accessed 2023-03-02. https://linkinghub.
elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0166361520304954.
https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.compind.2020.103261.
Matt, Dominik T., Guido Orzes, Erwin Rauch, and Patrick Dal-
lasega. 2020. “Urban Production – A Socially Sustainable
Factory Concept to Overcome Shortcomings of Qualified
Workers in Smart SMEs.” Computers & Industrial Engineer-
ing139:105384. Accessed 2023-03-02. https://linkinghub.
elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0360835218304157.
https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.cie.2018.08.035.
Mittal, Sameer, Muztoba Ahmad Khan, Jayant Kishor Puro-
hit, Karan Menon, David Romero, and Thorsten Wuest.
2020. “A Smart Manufacturing Adoption Framework for
SMEs.” International Journal of Production Research 58
(5): 1555–1573. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2019.166
1540.
Mittal, Sameer, Muztoba Ahmad Khan, David Romero, and
Thorsten Wuest. 2018. “A Critical Review of Smart Man-
ufacturing & Industry 4.0 Maturity Models: Implications
for Small and Medium-sized Enterprises (SMEs).” Journal
of Manufacturing Systems 49:194–214. Accessed 2023-05-03.
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S027861
2518301341. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmsy.2018.10.005.
Moeuf, Alexandre, Samir Lamouri, Robert Pellerin, Simon
Tamayo-Giraldo, Estefania Tobon-Valencia, and Romain
Eburdy. 2020. “Identification of Critical Success Fac-
tors, Risks and Opportunities of Industry 4.0 in SMEs.”
International Journal of Production Research 58 (5): 1384–
1400. Publisher: Taylor & Francis. https://doi.org/10.1080/
00207543.2019.1636323.
Moldovan, Liviu. 2019. “State-of-the-art Analysis on the
Knowledge and Skills Gaps on the Topic of Industry
4.0 and the Requirements for Work-based Learning.”
Procedia Manufacturing 32:294–301. 12th International
Conference Interdisciplinarity in Engineering, INTER-
ENG 2018, 4–5 October 2018, Tirgu Mures, Romania,
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S235197
8919302525. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.promfg.2019.02.217.
Møller, Julian M. 2019. “Assessing the Barriers to Industry
4.0 Implementation From a Workers’ Perspective.” IFAC-
PapersOnLine 52 (13): 2189–2194. Accessed 2023-03-02.
https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S24058963193
15149. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ifacol.2019.11.530.
Møller, Charles, Andreas Kornmaaler Hansen, Dan Palade,
Daniel Grud Hellerup Sørensen, Emil Blixt Hansen, Jonas
Nygaard Uhrenholt, and Maria Stoettrup Schioenning
Larsen. 2023. “Innovation Factory North: An Approach to
Make Small and Medium Sized Manufacturing Companies
Smarter.” In The Future of Smart Production for SMEs: A
Methodological and Practical Approach Towards Digitaliza-
tion in SMEs, edited by Ole Madsen, Ulrich Berger, Charles

--- [PAGE 22] ---
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PRODUCTION RESEARCH
6605
Møller, Astrid Heidemann Lassen, Brian Vejrum Waehrens,
and Casper Schou, 113–126. Cham: Springer International
Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-15428-7_10.
Motyl, Barbara, Gabriele Baronio, Stefano Uberti, Domenico
Speranza, and Stefano Filippi. 2017. “How Will Change
the Future Engineers’ Skills in the Industry 4.0 Frame-
work? A Questionnaire Survey.” Procedia Manufacturing 11:
1501–1509. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.promfg.2017.07.282.
Nakagawa, Elisa Yumi, Pablo Oliveira Antonino, Frank Schni
cke, Rafael Capilla, Thomas Kuhn, and Peter Liggesmeyer.
2021. “Industry 4.0 Reference Architectures: State of the
Art and Future Trends.” Computers & Industrial Engineering
156:107241. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0360835221001455. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2021.
107241.
Neumann, W. Patrick, Sven Winkelhaus, Eric H. Grosse, and
Christoph H. Glock. 2021. “Industry 4.0 and the Human Fac-
tor – A Systems Framework and Analysis Methodology for
Successful Development.” International Journal of Produc-
tion Economics 233:107992. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.
2020.107992.
NVivo, 2022. Accessed 2022-11-11. https://www.qsrinterna
tional.com/nvivo-qualitative-data-analysis-software/home.
Pivoto, Diego G. S., Luiz F. F. de Almeida, Rodrigo da Rosa
Righi, Joel J. P. C. Rodrigues, Alexandre Baratella Lugli, and
Antonio M. Alberti. 2021. “Cyber-physical Systems Archi-
tectures for Industrial Internet of Things Applications in
Industry 4.0: A Literature Review.” Journal of Manufactur-
ing Systems 58 (PA): 176–192. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmsy.
2020.11.017.
Pratt, Michael G., Sarah Kaplan, and Richard Whittington.
2020. “Editorial Essay: The Tumult Over Transparency:
Decoupling Transparency From Replication in Establishing
Trustworthy Qualitative Research.” Administrative Science
Quarterly 65 (1): 1–19. https://doi.org/10.1177/000183921
9887663.
Rangraz, Masood, and Lena Pareto. 2021. “Workplace Work-
integrated Learning: Supporting Industry 4.0 Transformation
for Small Manufacturing Plants by Reskilling Staff.” Inter-
national Journal of Lifelong Education 40 (1): 5–22. https://
doi.org/10.1080/02601370.2020.1867249.
Resman, Matevž, Miha Pipan, Marco Šimic, and Niko Her-
akovič. 2019. “A New Architecture Model for Smart
Manufacturing: A Performance Analysis and Comparison
with the RAMI 4.0 Reference Model.” Adv. Prod. Eng. Manag
14 (2): 153–165.
Saabye, Henrik, Thomas Borup Kristensen, and Brian Vejrum
Wæhrens. 2022. “Developing a Learning-to-learn Capabil-
ity: Insights on Conditions for Industry 4.0 Adoption.”
International Journal of Operations & Production Man-
agement42 (13): 25–53. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJOPM-07-
2021-0428.
Sharpe, Richard, Katherine van Lopik, Aaron Neal, Paul
Goodall, Paul P. Conway, and Andrew A. West. 2019.
“An Industrial Evaluation of An Industry 4.0 Reference
Architecture Demonstrating the Need for the Inclusion of
Security and Human Components.” Computers in Industry
108:37–44.
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0166361518304950.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.com
pind.2019.02.007.
Shet, Sateesh V., and Vijay Pereira. 2021. “Proposed Manage-
rial Competencies for Industry 4.0 – Implications for Social
Sustainability.” Technological Forecasting and Social Change
173:121080. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2021.121080.
Stentoft, Jan, Kent Adsbøll Wickstrøm, Kristian Philipsen,
and Anders Haug. 2021. “Drivers and Barriers for Indus-
try 4.0 Readiness and Practice: Empirical Evidence From
Small and Medium-sized Manufacturers.” Production Plan-
ning & Control 32 (10): 811–828. Accessed 2023-03-02.
https://doi.org/10.1080/09537287.2020.1768318.
Szász, Levente, Krisztina Demeter, Béla-Gergely Rácz, and
Dávid Losonci. 2020. “Industry 4.0: a Review and Anal-
ysis of Contingency and Performance Effects.” Journal of
Manufacturing Technology Management 32 (3): 667–694.
Publisher: Emerald Publishing Limited, Accessed 2023-08-
08. https://doi.org/10.1108/JMTM-10-2019-0371.
Tortorella, Guilherme, Rogério Miorando, Rodrigo Caiado,
Daniel Nascimento, and Alberto Portioli Staudacher. 2021.
“The Mediating Effect of Employees’ Involvement on the
Relationship Between Industry 4.0 and Operational Perfor-
mance Improvement.” Total Quality Management & Busi-
ness Excellence 32 (1-2): 119–133. Accessed 2023-03-02.
https://doi.org/10.1080/14783363.2018.1532789.
Van De Ven, Andrew H., and Paul E. Johnson. 2006.
“Knowledge for Theory and Practice.” Academy of Man-
agement Review 31 (4): 802–821. Accessed 2023-01-05.
https://doi.org/10.5465/amr.2006.22527385.
Voss, Chris, Mark Johnson, and Jan Godsell. 2016. “Case
Research.” In Research Methods for Operations Management,
165–197. Cham: Springer International Publishing.
Xu, Xun, Yuqian Lu, Birgit Vogel-Heuser, and Lihui Wang.
2021. “Industry 4.0 and Industry 5.0 – Inception, Con-
ception and Perception.” Journal of Manufacturing Systems
61:530–535. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmsy.2021.10.006.
Xu, Li Da, Eric L. Xu, and Ling Li. 2018. “Industry 4.0: State
of the Art and Future Trends.” International Journal of Pro-
duction Research 56 (8): 2941–2962. https://doi.org/10.1080/
00207543.2018.1444806.
