
--- [PAGE 1] ---
Business Administration and Management
87
2024, volume 27, issue 2, pp. 87–107, DOI: 10.15240/tul/001/2024-2-006
The role of leadership in managing 
digital transformation: 
A systematic literature review
Lazar Rakovic1, Slobodan Maric2, Lena Djordjevic Milutinovic3, 
Vuk Vukovic4, Radmila Bjekic5
1	
University of  Novi Sad, Faculty of  Economics in  Subotica, Department for Business Informatics, Serbia, 
ORCID: 0000-0002-1465-588X, lazar.rakovic@ef.uns.ac.rs;
2	
University of  Novi Sad, Faculty of  Economics in  Subotica, Department for Management, Serbia, ORCID: 
0000-0002-7414-4037, slobodan.maric@ef.uns.ac.rs (corresponding author);
3	
University of Belgrade, Faculty of Organisational Sciences, Department for Production and Services Management, 
Serbia, ORCID: 0000-0002-3758-0147, lena.djordjevic.milutinovic@fon.bg.ac.rs;
4	
University of  Novi Sad, Faculty of  Economics in  Subotica, Department for Business Informatics, Serbia, 
ORCID: 0000-0002-0040-9936, vuk.vukovic@ef.uns.ac.rs;
5	
University of  Novi Sad, Faculty of  Economics in  Subotica, Department for Management, Serbia, ORCID: 
0000-0002-7263-8025, radmila.bjekic@ef.uns.ac.rs.
Abstract: Digital transformation should not be seen as a time-bound project, but rather as a process 
that needs to be continuously improved and managed over time. In the absence of leadership, 
digital transformation will occur spontaneously in an organisation, but it is necessary to monitor and 
manage the process itself to achieve the goal and establish a digital organisation. A person who leads 
the digital transformation must possess the appropriate competencies. Leadership competencies, 
especially the combination of digital and human skills, are crucial to the development and success of 
the digital transformation process. The authors of this article identify a vaguely described process 
of digital transformation as the main research problem, highlighting the need for the systematisation 
of leadership competencies necessary for effective digital transformation management. In  this 
regard, the research objectives are to define and describe the process of digital transformation 
and identify the  leadership competencies necessary for successful management of  the  digital 
transformation process. In  order to  achieve the  objectives of  the  paper, a  systematic literature 
review was conducted for the period 2001–2022 and 90 papers were identified based on the criteria 
outlined by the Web of Science and Scopus index databases. The identified papers were then 
analysed from the aspect of defining digital transformation, the activities of the digital transformation 
process, and the characteristics of digital leadership. Following a thorough analysis of the selected 
literature, the  paper provides a  comprehensive definition of  digital transformation, proposes 
a  framework for its management, and analyses the  key competencies of  digital transformation 
leaders (digital leaders), which together make up the paper’s main contribution. The paper can 
be used not only as a starting point for future research in this area, but also as initial guidelines 
for the  implementation and management of  the  digital transformation process. The  systematic 
literature review conducted has certain limitations. Only two, albeit the largest, citation databases 
were searched, and only papers in English were identified. The established framework should be 
verified and expanded through empirical research.
Keywords: Digital transformation, leadership, digital leadership, systematic literature review.
JEL Classification: M10, M15.

--- [PAGE 2] ---
Business Administration and Management
88
2024, volume 27, issue 2, pp. 87–107, DOI: 10.15240/tul/001/2024-2-006
APA Style Citation: Rakovic, L., Maric, S., Djordjevic Milutinovic, L., Vukovic, V., & Bjekic, R. 
(2024). The role of leadership in managing digital transformation: A systematic literature review. 
E&M Economics and Management, 27(2), 87–107. https://doi.org/10.15240/tul/001/2024-2-006
Introduction
The existing literature within the research field 
is insufficiently homogeneous and inadequately 
integrated, resulting in  insufficient knowledge 
about the  competencies required for leaders 
to successfully carry out the process of digital 
transformation (Müller et  al., 2024). Leaders 
must develop their individual capacities and 
competence to  provide a  better understand-
ing of  the  change in  dynamic environments 
through a  strong global vision (Elidjen et  al., 
2019). Digital transformation is changing many 
aspects of  how people work (Schwarzmüller 
et  al., 2018), and these changes do  not ex-
hibit any signs of  deceleration. Leaders have 
a  fundamental role in  organisations, such  as 
leading these changes (Evans et al., 2021) and 
influencing people to perform activities in more 
efficient and creative ways (Grigore & Coman, 
2018). Digital transformation requires leaders 
to quickly adapt existing approaches in today’s 
highly dynamic environment. Business and 
IT leaders need to collaborate (since technol-
ogy and leadership skills are complementary), 
and new approaches should be adapted to re-
spond to changes in the competitive and tech-
nological environment (Hansen et  al., 2011; 
Ko  et  al., 2022; Philip &  Gavrilova Aguilar, 
2022). Leadership and digital transformation 
cannot be considered separately, but they must 
support each other in the application and sus-
tainability of any digital transformation initiative 
in an organisation (Jayawardena et al., 2020; 
Zulu & Khosrowshahi, 2021).
Digital transformation is the driver of posi-
tive but also devastating market changes (Al-
Nuaimi et al., 2022; Kokolek et al., 2019) and 
represents more than just a technological evo-
lution (Criado-Perez et al., 2022) that must be 
adequately managed. As for devastating market 
changes, Kokolek et al. (2019) argue that tech-
nology is increasingly entering everyday life 
as well as the world of business, and changing 
how business is conducted. Moreover, emerg-
ing IT risks, such as security breaches, privacy 
concerns, and safety issues (Vial, 2019), along-
side implementation costs, can have profoundly 
adverse effects on the market.
According to Luo et al. (2023), it is necessary 
to attract highly qualified top managers in order 
to  ensure a  successful digital transformation, 
but they did not address what competencies 
they should possess. Porfírio et  al. (2021) 
concluded 
that 
managers’ 
characteristics, 
especially democratic leadership styles, are 
particularly important at the beginning of digi-
tal transformation. Furthermore, a  three-fold 
alignment and involvement are necessary, 
comprising organisation, digital transformation 
and leadership. According to  Carvalho et  al. 
(2023), top managers differ in different indus-
tries (sectors or economic activities) and es-
sential changes to the leadership process have 
been identified based on environmental factors. 
In this way, a set of characteristics that are es-
sential for the effective achievement of organ-
isational objectives is identified, predominantly 
from a communication perspective.
As  Müller et  al. (2024) point out, the  lit-
erature exists in  fragments, and knowledge 
about the  leadership competencies required 
for digital transformation is lacking. The same 
authors emphasise that leaders must possess 
different competencies depending on the driv-
ers and goals of  the  digital transformation. 
A key finding of their research is that the classic 
all-encompassing leadership approach cannot 
guide digital transformation. Moreover, they 
assert that different combinations of technical, 
business, and people-oriented competencies 
will be needed depending on  whether market 
innovations are explored, operational efficiency 
is supported, stakeholder involvement is en-
sured, and competitive positioning is improved. 
Thus, digital transformation leadership is 
becoming increasingly relevant in  theoretical 
and empirical research. The  previous state-
ments are illustrated by  fragmented and 
missing knowledge about which leadership 
competencies the  business requires in  order 
to  facilitate digital transformation. According 
to  a  theoretical perspective, four archetypical 
competency portfolios are outlined, which are 
based on the  types of  leaders who embody 
the  constituent competencies: the  challenger 
(exploring the market innovations), the bricoleur 

--- [PAGE 3] ---
Business Administration and Management
89
2024, volume 27, issue 2, pp. 87–107, DOI: 10.15240/tul/001/2024-2-006
(supporting operational efficiency), the  organ-
iser (ensuring active stakeholder participation), 
and the competitor (improving competitive posi-
tion; Müller et al., 2024).
Strategic implications of digital transforma-
tion must be considered both at the daily op-
erational level and in the development process. 
Kringelum et  al. (2024) identified five strategic 
actions that leaders should consider when 
embarking on digital transformation to succeed 
with strategic change: i)  discussion and com-
munication about vision and strategy; ii) aligning 
resources and activities with strategy; iii)  de-
veloping the  competencies of  top managers, 
middle managers and employees; iv) ensuring 
operational improvements and efficiency; and 
v)  creating an  orientation toward customer or 
user needs and expectations. 
Based on  several sources, Braojos et  al. 
(2024) argue that digital leadership is concep-
tualised as a  style of  competencies, behav-
iours, and practices that inspire and motivate 
employees in the context of digital transforma-
tion. Мoreover, Zivkovic (2022) points out that 
the  necessary leadership competencies are 
flexibility, experimentation, and understanding 
of  digital technologies. In  his opinion, digital 
transformation leaders should not be IT experts, 
but they should understand how digital technolo-
gies impact organisational culture, performance, 
and development. In  support of  this state-
ment, Schwarzmüller et  al. (2018) state that 
digital transformation leaders must possess 
the competence to lead a team of people from 
diverse cultures. Furthermore, this implies lan-
guage competence and the ability to lead from 
a distance as well.
Therefore, digital leadership is crucial for 
leading digital transformation, i.e., strong lead-
ership is necessary for the  success of  digital 
transformation (Zulu &  Khosrowshahi, 2021). 
There is an  evident lack of  research aimed 
at understanding digital transformation and 
leadership itself (Henderikx & Stoffers, 2022), 
while digital transformation in the  digital era 
requires extraordinary skills and competencies 
(Noonpakdee et al., 2020).
Kontic and Vidicki (2018) point out that 
initiative-taking leadership is one of  the  key 
factors that will help the organisation become 
digital. Leadership in the  digital era implies 
a deep understanding of digital business mod-
els (Jacobi &  Brenner, 2018). Given the  new 
circumstances, Schwaferts and Baldi (2018) 
raise the question as to whether standard man-
agement concepts are still adequate for the pe-
riod during and after the digital transformation. 
Digital transformation must be initiated by 
the management rather than by the IT depart-
ment, which could only achieve part of the nec-
essary changes (Ko et al., 2022). Digitisation, 
digitalisation and digital transformation are 
the  terms often identified with each other 
(Kohnke, 2017). Digital transformation includes 
digitisation and digitalisation (Paul et al., 2024), 
but digital transformation is  a  more complex 
and comprehensive concept (O’Leary, 2023). 
According to  Venkatesh et  al. (2019), digital 
transformation has evolved through digitisation 
and digitalisation up to the digital transformation 
itself, which encompasses the entire company’s 
business model.
To recognise the necessary characteristics 
of digital transformation leadership, it is neces-
sary to understand the very concept of digital 
transformation as  well  as the  implied steps 
(key activities; Ubiparipovic et al., 2023), as ex-
plained in the paper based on the literature. Mül-
ler et al. (2024) pointed the theoretical-practical 
gap in  digital transformation management, 
taking into account the fact that digital transfor-
mation requires persistent digital leadership at 
the top level of the organisation, and that no co-
herent concept of digital leadership exists today 
(Müller et al., 2024). Since most organisations 
are only halfway through the digital transforma-
tion process, it is necessary to emphasise that 
most companies must undertake a  challeng-
ing path in  order to  achieve digital maturity. 
However, 70%  of  digital transformation initia-
tives fail to achieve their objectives (Alshehab 
et al., 2022). The path to digital transformation 
within an  organisation is  a  multidimensional 
and complex process that requires effective 
leadership. This entails that in the  digital era, 
and leaders must adapt their knowledge, skills, 
and abilities to successfully drive the process 
of digital transformation within the organisation 
(Urs et al., 2023).
After reviewing the  previous research, 
a research problem was identified in the form 
of a vaguely described and defined digital trans-
formation process, along with the need to sys-
tematise the leadership competencies required 
to  successfully manage digital transformation. 
The main objective of the research is to define 
and describe the process of digital transformation 
as well as to identify the necessary leadership 

--- [PAGE 4] ---
Business Administration and Management
90
2024, volume 27, issue 2, pp. 87–107, DOI: 10.15240/tul/001/2024-2-006
competencies for the successful management 
of the digital transformation process.
To  address the  main objective of  the  re-
search, the authors analysed and used 90 se-
lected papers published in the period from 2001 
to  2022. A  systematic review of  the  literature 
was conducted to  identify these papers, 
which is described in the  following section. 
The  papers were then analysed from the  as-
pect of  three identified sub-units. Based on 
the analysed papers, a comprehensive defini-
tion of  digital transformation was proposed, 
followed by  a  conceptual framework of  digital 
transformation and key leadership characteris-
tics needed for the successful implementation 
of the digital transformation process. 
1.	 Research methodology
As part of the research process and the imple-
mentation of  the  systematic literature review 
methodology, as  well  as in  order to  answer 
the basic research question and achieve the set 
research goals (which will be discussed in the fol-
lowing sections), three basic segments can be 
identified (Xiao &  Watson, 2019): i)  planning 
the review; ii) conducting the review; and iii) re-
porting the review (Fig. 1). In accordance with 
the mentioned methodology and within the first 
phase of  the  systematic literature review, 
the  authors managed to: 1)  define a  spe­cific 
research problem (general research questions); 
and 2) develop a complete research algorithm 
(protocol) to be used for the research in this pa-
per. Step 3 – the initial search within the select-
ed databases by title, abstract and key words 
was carried out in the second part of conduct-
ing the  literature review. During this phase, 
the  fourth step entails screening for inclusion 
by analysing abstracts according to the inclu-
sion criteria. As the research was done in two 
databases (Web of  Science and Scopus, for 
the period 2001–2022), duplicates were elimi-
nated in the fifth step based on the received list 
of potential papers. In this segment of the pro-
cess, the sixth step involves evaluating the qual-
ity of the complete papers, as well as respecting 
the  general quality of  the  papers regarding 
the  methodology applied, concept, content, 
and results of the research, and in accordance 
with the inclusion criteria previously mentioned. 
Once the  final set of  papers was obtained, 
an additional review of the literature of the iden-
tified papers, as  well  as papers that cited 
the  identified papers (forward and backward 
research) was performed in the seventh step. 
Finally, in  step  8, the  analysis and synthesis 
of the  papers were carried out in  accordance 
with the defined concept of the research. A re-
view report was created based on the obtained 
results in the third segment of the literature re-
view process, which is also the final, ninth step 
of the comprehensive literature review.
Based on the  identified research problem 
stated in the Introduction section, the following 
research questions were formulated as the ba-
sis of this study in the first stage of the metho-
dology – planning the review: 
RQ1: What is implied by the  term digital 
transformation and what are the  challenges, 
factors and steps of the digital transformation 
process?
RQ2: What leadership competencies and 
characteristics are necessary to  successfully 
lead the digital transformation process? 
Xiao and Watson (2019) also recommend 
that during certain segments of  the  literature 
review process, the  research is to  be con-
ducted in  such a  way that the  authors are 
divided into two groups that carry out each 
step independently, and then integrate their 
findings and discuss the  differences in  each 
step in order to screen the selected papers for 
final analysis. In Fig. 1, the steps of the applied 
methodology and the  results of  the  selec-
tion as part of  the  analysis of  the  papers are 
described in detail.
Following an  initial search and analysis 
of the literature, the authors identified the insuf-
ficient success of the digital transformation pro-
cess and the inability of businesses to achieve 
their desired goals through digital platforms. 
Furthermore, as we delved deeper into the re-
search area, we  realised that the  key role 
in digital transformation is played by the human 
factor, i.e.,  human versus technology, which 
led us to include the sub-unit of management 
or leadership in organisations in our research. 
A key point that must be noted during this phase 
of the research is that the research questions 
were developed through an  iterative process, 
after the authors had gathered more informa-
tion and knowledge by conducting a literature 
search and analysis focusing on the most com-
mon digital transformation issues.
Fig. 1 shows how the review was conducted 
according to all stages and relevant criteria and 
what results each stage reached.

--- [PAGE 5] ---
Business Administration and Management
91
2024, volume 27, issue 2, pp. 87–107, DOI: 10.15240/tul/001/2024-2-006
Literature search. Three main search 
sources were used as literature search channels: 
i) the mentioned electronic databases (WoS and 
Scopus); ii)  backward searching (identifying 
the relevant papers cited in the included articles, 
using the reference list at the end of the paper 
is a good way to find these articles); and iii) for-
ward searching (finding and selecting articles 
that cite the original paper that has been found). 
The  search was performed for the  period 
from 2001 to  2022. This time period was de-
termined based on the topicality of the research 
area, the  volume of  published papers and 
the electronic availability of papers. Based on 
the  research question, the  keywords related 
to “leadership” and “digital transformation” were 
selected. Among the  papers included were 
only those published in English in journals and 
Fig. 1:
Search strategy and selection criteria
Source: own
Excluding: 
WoS (n=338)
Scopus (n=237)
Search literature
Database: WoS and Scopus (2001 – 2022)
Keywords identification: Leadership* AND “Digital transformation”*
Group of authors A: 
WoS (n=439)
Scopus (n=328)
Group of authors B: 
WoS (n=439)
Scopus (n=328)
Screen for 
inclusion
Screening: title, abstract and keywords
Results of initial research:
Inclusion criteria:
- Definition of digital transformation process
- Digital transformation framework
- Characteristics (skills) of leadership style 
 
Group of authors A: 
WoS (n=85)
Scopus (n=123)
Results of screening:
Group of authors B: 
WoS (n=101)
Scopus (n=91)
Merge WoS articles of A and B authors group
WoS (n=67)
Scopus (n=104)
Merge Scopus articles of A and B authors group
Merge Scopus and WoS articles
WoS and Scopus (n=129)
Assess quality
Assesing: download and review complete papers
Excluding: (n=119)
Excluding: (n=110)
Excluding: (n=42)
Complete text of the paper assessed for 
eligibility
Downloading complete papers
Final No. of the papers  (n=90)
Additional  paper identified through forward 
backward searches
Including: (n=11)
WoS and Scopus (n=129)
Excluding: (n=50)
WoS and Scopus (n=79)
ExclUding: 
WoS (n=354)
Scopus (n=205)
Final number of papers (n=90)
Excluding: 

--- [PAGE 6] ---
Business Administration and Management
92
2024, volume 27, issue 2, pp. 87–107, DOI: 10.15240/tul/001/2024-2-006
at conferences, as  well  as chapters in  mono-
graphs. The  search ended after determining 
that no new results would be obtained by apply-
ing the search strategy. Group authors A and B 
conducted the  search within selected data-
bases and defined keywords during December 
2022, while the search results, i.e., the number 
of initial hits, due to the same search criteria, 
was identical and amounted to  WoS n  =  439 
and Scopus n = 328. 
Screening for inclusion. For screening 
and selecting papers for final analysis, Xiao 
and Watson (2019) recommend that at least 
two researchers evaluate papers indepen-
dently according to  set criteria. Two groups 
of  authors  A  and  B, conducted the  literature 
review separately in  this paper, with phase 
alignment and consultation between both 
groups. A screening process for selecting pa-
pers/including papers was conducted by  both 
groups of authors based on the title, abstract, 
and keywords of the papers, along with defined 
inclusion criteria. 
Three separate criteria were used to select 
the  papers on  which this research is based. 
On  the  one hand, these criteria represent 
the derivative of the research questions, while 
on the other hand, they serve as the basis for 
selecting an  individual study on  which further 
steps will be taken in the  research process. 
For a paper to be selected for further analysis, 
it must meet at least one of the following crite-
ria: the first criterion, defining digital transforma-
tion – from a leadership position, understanding 
the digital transformation process is necessary 
if we are going to ensure its success, which is 
why we  need to  define the  concept of  digital 
transformation and ensure that its absolute 
understanding is presented at the  begin-
ning of  the  paper. The  second criterion, 
the  conceptual framework, or  steps of  digital 
transformation –  understanding the  essential 
elements of the concept of digital transforma-
tion – is significant for the successful manage-
ment of the digital transformation process and 
the achievement of set goals. The third criterion 
is the leadership characteristics necessary for 
the  successful management of  the  digital 
transformation process.
Following the screening procedure previous-
ly described, the following results were obtained 
for the  initial list of  papers: from the  original 
number of  hits (n  =  439) within the  WoS  da-
tabase, the  authors of  Group  A  selected 
85 papers and excluded 354 papers (Group A, 
WoS, n = 85, excluding n = 354), while the au-
thors from the same group within the Scopus 
database, selected 123  papers and excluded 
205 papers (Group A, Scopus, n = 123, exclud-
ing n  =  205) from the  original number of  hits 
(n  =  328). From the  original number of  hits 
(n = 439) within WoS, the authors from Group B 
selected 101 papers and excluded 338 papers 
(Group A, WoS, n = 101, excluding n = 338), 
while the authors from the same group within 
the Scopus database, selected 91 papers and 
excluded 237 papers (Group B, Scopus, n = 91, 
excluding n  =  237) from the  original number 
of hits (n = 328). The next step involved com-
bining the  selected papers of  the  two groups 
of  authors from both databases, removing 
duplicates, and discussing the  reasons for 
choosing different papers between the  two 
groups of authors. During the discussion, it was 
decided to  exclude papers for which there 
were not enough arguments for the  selection 
stage. As  a  result of  combining papers from 
both groups of authors, eliminating duplicates 
and excluding papers based on  discussion 
within the WoS database, 67 papers remained, 
while 119  papers were eliminated (WoS, 
n  =  91, excluding n  =  237). By  combining 
the papers of both groups of authors, eliminat-
ing duplicates and excluding papers based on 
the  discussion within the  Scopus database, 
104  papers remained and 110  papers were 
excluded (WoS, n = 104, excluding n = 110). 
The  next step of  the  screening process was 
to  combine papers from both databases and 
exclude duplicates. After combining the papers 
from both databases and excluding duplicates, 
129  papers remained, while 42  papers were 
excluded since they appeared in  both data-
bases in the  previous step (WoS  +  Scopus, 
n = 129, excluding n = 42). 
Assess quality. Following the  screening 
process, the  next segment of  the  conducted 
literature review involved downloading previ-
ously selected papers from the  screening 
process and assessing their quality. In prepar-
ing the  final list of  papers for data extraction 
and synthesis, the  quality of  the  complete 
papers is assessed. Research questions and 
the application of defined selection criteria are 
used to  evaluate the  papers’ completeness. 
A  paper’s quality is also assessed based on 
the  method of  collecting data, the  analy-
sis process, the  methodology applied, and 

--- [PAGE 7] ---
Business Administration and Management
93
2024, volume 27, issue 2, pp. 87–107, DOI: 10.15240/tul/001/2024-2-006
the  obtained results and conclusions. Based 
on the  quality assessment, 79  papers were 
selected and  50  were excluded (preliminary 
final list, n = 79, excluding n = 50). During this 
stage of assessing the quality of the complete 
papers, the  authors from Groups  A  and B 
independently assessed each paper in  order 
to  harmonise the  selected papers and reach 
the results described previously. As a final step 
toward reaching the  final list of  papers which 
will serve as the basis for this paper, forward 
and backward searches were conducted, and 
an additional 19 papers were included on that 
basis (for and back search, n  =  11), bringing 
the  total number of  papers selected to  be  90 
to provide a response to the research question 
(final number of papers, n = 90). 
Extract data. Based on the  literature re-
view of  the  selected papers, information was 
extracted on  two topics: i)  definition of  digital 
transformation 
and 
conceptual 
framework 
of  digital transformation; and ii)  characteris-
tics, role and style of leadership. Data extrac-
tion from the  selected papers is guided by 
the method of synthesis selected, which, in this 
case, is a textual narrative synthesis. Generally, 
coding is used to extract data, especially during 
a literature review, which was conducted induc-
tively according to selected topics. 
Analyse and synthesise data. After 
the data was extracted, the authors organised 
the data in accordance with the review concept. 
In this phase of the literature review, techniques 
such as tables and text descriptions were used. 
The  method of  contingent design was used 
as the main method of analysis and synthesis 
of the extracted data, which represents a cyclical 
research synthesis. Consequently, the selected 
quantitative and qualitative papers are intended 
to address a specific research question. 
2. Research findings
2.1 
Defining digital transformation
The  continuous emergence of  new tech-
nologies is evident in recent years (Zhu et al., 
2021). Although digital transformation has 
penetrated many aspects of  organisations, 
transformed 
business 
models 
(Danielsen, 
2020), in some cases disrupting existing busi-
nesses and economies (Philip &  Gavrilova 
Aguilar, 2022; Zimmermann et al., 2019), being 
inevitable in all industries (Gurkan et al., 2020), 
and becoming a buzzword in the last few years 
(Abbu et al., 2021), it is a relatively new concept 
that is very difficult to  define clearly (Kokolek 
et al., 2019). The authors generally agree that 
digital transformation is a process (Egor, 2020; 
Engesmo &  Panteli, 2021; Lorentzen, 2022) 
that manifests itself in different ways and with 
different intensity (Engesmo &  Panteli, 2021). 
As  digital transformation is  a  continuous pro-
cess, its monitoring and management are nec-
essary (Egor, 2020). It can be said that digital 
transformation is an  inevitable and irrevers-
ible process (Zhu et al., 2021) that represents 
a  chance for innovation within organisations 
(Zulu & Khosrowshahi, 2021) driven by clients’ 
expectations and behaviour (Evans et  al., 
2021). Digital transformation is often associ-
ated with technology, corporate culture, society, 
creativity and change management (Tungpan-
tong et  al., 2021). Many organisations focus 
digital transformation too much on technology 
alone. This is precisely why many digital trans-
formation processes fail (Jayawardena et  al., 
2020). Digital tools cannot just be purchased 
and simply attached to an organisation (Egor, 
2020). Needless to  say, digital technologies 
cannot be neglected in the digital transforma-
tion, because they play one of the main roles 
in the digital transformation (Vial, 2019). A com-
pany should learn about new technologies, 
as well as develop new capabilities that allow 
it to reposition itself strategically, because new 
technologies can cause disruptions that can 
threaten the business of a particular company 
(Pihlajamaa et al., 2021). Therefore, it is impos-
sible to talk about digital transformation without 
mentioning the technologies, in which the au-
thors often include, e.g., social media, internet 
of things, mobility, big data and analytics, cloud 
computing, artificial intelligence and blockchain 
(Florek-Paszkowska et al., 2021; Tekic & Koro-
teev, 2019). From these groups of technologies, 
it is necessary to choose and apply the ones 
(Venkatesh et al., 2019) that are most appro-
priate to  the  organisation or to  the  strategy 
of digital transformation.
Carcary et al. (2016) even state that organ-
isations should not initially focus on a holistic set 
of required capabilities, but on the development 
of basic capabilities that will become the start-
ing point for digital transformation and later 
lead to the development of all necessary digital 
capabilities. The same authors point out the fol-
lowing as basic or key areas on  which orga­
nisations should initially focus: promoting and 
implementing an agile digital culture, developing 

--- [PAGE 8] ---
Business Administration and Management
94
2024, volume 27, issue 2, pp. 87–107, DOI: 10.15240/tul/001/2024-2-006
digital leadership skills, building digital talent 
and defining and implementing a transformative 
digital business strategy. According to Zhu et al. 
(2021), digital transformation implies a  transi-
tion from a product-centric to a customer-centric 
strategy. Therefore, the  management needs 
to adapt its business strategy to the digital reali­
ty (Reis & Melao, 2023).
Florek-Paszkowska et  al. (2021) group 
the  levers that will influence successful digital 
transformation into two groups: human-based 
and non-human based factors. The  first group 
includes, in the first place, competent, respon-
sible, and open-minded leaders, who are open 
to  change, flexible and able to  quickly adapt. 
The  authors then mention talented employees 
who are ready to  share their expertise, learn 
quickly, and adapt, as  part of  the  first group. 
The  second group, non-human based factors, 
implies a business culture that should empower 
employees, and business models that are eas-
ily transformed in order to create an innovative 
business model, new strategies and support 
(disruptive) technologies. This can be followed 
by team-based levers that enable digital trans-
formation, which were identified in their research 
by Guinan et al. (2019): diverse team composi-
tion, iterative goal setting, continuous learning 
Source
Definition/explanation of the concept of digital transformation
Reis and Melao 
(2023)
Digital transformation is the use of new digital technologies that enables major 
business improvements and influences all aspects of customers’ lives.
Kutnjak et al. 
(2019)
Digital transformation is a complex and demanding process that requires 
the engagement of all enterprise resources – human, technological, physical, 
organisational and financial. DT is the transformation of an organisation driven 
by digital technology, and it directly affects the change of the organisation’s 
core, that is, the change of its business model.
Brown and Brown 
(2019)
Digital transformation is defined as the implementation of innovative and new 
digital technologies to effect business improvements in an organisation.
Venkatesh et al. 
(2019)
Digital transformation or digital business transformation is thus about 
embracing digitisation and digitalisation concepts to create novel and different 
business designs or business model as a whole for better long-term value. 
It is much more than automating or digitising business processes or digitising 
products and services.
Vial 
(2019)
Digital transformation is a process that aims to improve an entity by triggering 
significant changes to its properties through combinations of information, 
computing, communication, and connectivity technologies.
Tu and Chi 
(2020)
Digital transformation has been defined as the use of new digital 
technologies, such as mobile, artificial intelligence (AI), cloud, blockchain, 
and IoT technologies, to enable major business improvements to augment 
customer experience, streamline operations, or create new business models. 
The key long-term technological trends are the increasing capability of the firm 
with customers to communicate, collect, store and analyse information.
Fachrunnisa et al. 
(2020)
Digital transformation is a process or business for the company in facilitating 
the relationship between customers with the company itself, simplifying 
the various processes by changing the business model through the recent 
technology. This change is not only limited to the use of technology but also 
has an impact on the structure and strategy of the company to fit the business 
model due to the new technology.
Abdallah et al. 
(2021)
Digital transformation (DT) is a customer-centric mechanism that enables 
continuous improvement in the productivity of the manufacturing processes 
using advanced digital technologies such as cloud computing, internet 
of things, big data analytics, digital twin in all aspects of the organisation.
Source: own
Tab. 1:
The definitions of digital transformation

--- [PAGE 9] ---
Business Administration and Management
95
2024, volume 27, issue 2, pp. 87–107, DOI: 10.15240/tul/001/2024-2-006
and talent management. Based on the research 
conducted, Engesmo and Panteli (2021) suggest 
that organisations should adapt their IT functions 
to support digital transformation. When discuss-
ing digital transformation, it is important to take 
into account that digital business models often 
require the organisation to participate in or initi-
ate a certain digital ecosystem in which traditional 
relationships with suppliers and customers are 
challenged (Criado-Perez et  al., 2022; Schwa-
ferts & Baldi, 2018).
Reis and Melao (2023) identified three dif-
ferent elements of digital transformation based 
on a review of different definitions of digital trans-
formation. The first element includes the techno-
logical digital transformation that encompasses 
technologies (e.g.,  social media, mobile, ana-
lytics). The  second element is the  structural 
digital transformation, which requires changes 
in business processes and the creation of new 
business models. Finally, as the third element, 
the  authors mention the  human digital trans-
formation that affects all aspects of  human 
life (e.g., improving customer experience). Ac-
cording to Weritz et al. (2020) three main parts 
of digital transformation are products (services), 
clients and processes. Tab. 1 shows the defini-
tions of digital transformation identified through 
a systematic review of the literature.
2.2	
The framework of digital transformation
The road map for digital transformation should 
be developed, which will guide the organisation 
to where it wants to be in the future (Evans et al., 
2021). The problem is that digital initiatives are 
not always strategically oriented and clearly 
defined (Engesmo &  Panteli, 2021), or  man-
agement often does not see the  difference 
between digital transformation initiatives and 
smaller-scale initiatives aimed at increasing ef-
ficiency (Solberg et al., 2020). In other words, 
a non-strategic view of digitisation is precisely 
what is reflected here.
Kokolek et al. (2019) state that the prereq-
uisite for the success of digital transformation 
is the  acquisition and development of  six key 
factors, as follows: digital knowledge and skills, 
ability to  apply new technologies to  the  busi-
ness, continuous learning, strategic vision, 
network leadership and agility. Criado-Perez 
et al. (2022) point out that traditional organisa-
tions cannot adapt to the changing environment 
by  solely relying on  educational institutions 
as they once did. They argue that employee 
training is essential for organisations to adapt 
to  the  changing environment. As  challenges 
of digital transformation, Hai et al. (2021) cite 
limited infrastructure, lack of skills and the fact 
that management has not adapted to the digital 
transformation process. Digital transformation 
is a widely adopted process, which significantly 
complicates its successful implementation. 
Therefore, companies need both employees who 
are engaged and support the digital transforma-
tion process, as well as leaders who are reliable 
and possess adequate competencies to  lead 
and support employees through the digital trans-
formation process (Heracleous & Gledhill, 2024). 
As  a  result, digital transformation presents 
a number of challenges to organisations (Tab. 2 
provides the most significant challenges).
Imran et  al. (2021) identify leadership, or-
ganisational structure, and culture as the main 
drivers of  digital transformation. According 
to  their research, developing leadership com-
petencies 
facilitates 
digital 
transformation 
Challenge
Source
Limited infrastructure
Hai et al. (2021)
Lack of skills
Hai et al. (2021)
Not adapted management, lack of knowledge to lead digital 
transformation
Hai et al. (2021),  
Salume et al. (2021) 
Lack of resources to incorporate digital technologies
Van Tonder et al. (2020)
Culture in an organisation
Evans et al. (2021) 
Employee resistance
Trenerry et al. (2021)
Source: own
Tab. 2:
Challenges of digital transformation

--- [PAGE 10] ---
Business Administration and Management
96
2024, volume 27, issue 2, pp. 87–107, DOI: 10.15240/tul/001/2024-2-006
because organisations become more agile, 
more customer-centric and more collaborative. 
They mention organisational structure and cul-
ture as the next drivers. Having a flexible organ-
isational structure and an organisational culture 
that embraces change will make implementing 
digital transformation easier.
Digital transformation requires commitment 
from management, while the  IT  department 
plays a  less significant role (Ko  et  al., 2022). 
According to Ko et al. (2022), a strategic frame-
work for digital transformation is one of the key 
activities of digital transformation. Although dig-
ital transformation is necessary for the survival 
of modern organisations (Trenerry et al., 2021), 
the management often lacks adequate knowl-
edge about the different elements that should 
be considered when transforming a  business 
digitally (Salume et  al., 2021). Organisations 
today face a  big challenge when it  comes 
to  managing digital transformation (Boneva, 
2018). As  a  result, identifying the  key factors 
of digital transformation is vital (Tab. 3).
Strategy in the digital age must be swift and 
supported by  a  roadmap for implementation 
(Jacobi &  Brenner, 2018). As  a  result, digital 
transformation is not much different from other 
business transformations, and a  roadmap is 
required (Evans et al., 2021; Jacobi & Brenner, 
2018; Kohnke, 2017; Zaoui &  Souissi, 2020). 
Organisations should identify the  steps they 
should follow in  their digital transformation 
process. Tab. 4 shows the most frequently men-
tioned steps of digital transformation in the lit-
erature. It  is important to  consider that they 
are not sequential and should be implemented 
according to the needs of the industry and or-
ganisation on the path to digital transformation.
2.3	
Leadership in process of digital 
transformation
Based on a systematic review of the literature, 
we found that three aspects are present within 
the analysed publications that explicitly discuss 
the  definition of  digital leadership. Firstly, 
existing literature does not clearly define the 
relationship between e-leadership and digital 
leadership. E-leadership is defined as a  pro-
cess of  social influence with the  mediation 
Factors
Source
Customer centricity
Mhlungu et al. (2019), Abdallah et al. (2021)
Corporate processes and structure
Imran et al. (2021), Jacobi and Brenner (2018), 
Alshehab et al. (2022)
Digital knowledge and skills
Kokolek et al. (2019), Imran et al. (2021)
Agility 
Kokolek et al. (2019)
Leadership
Kokolek et al. (2019), Imran et al. (2021), 
Jacobi and Brenner (2018), Alshehab et al. 
(2022), Trenerry et al. (2021)
Continuous learning/upgrading/retraining
Kokolek et al. (2019), Weritz et al. (2020)
Commitment of the management
Ko et al. (2022)
Strategic vision, creation of the strategic 
framework of DT
Kokolek et al. (2019), Ko et al. (2022)
Ability to apply new technologies to the business
Kokolek et al. (2019),
Possessing the necessary capabilities to ensure 
digital transformation
Van Tonder et al. (2020)
Creating a digital transformation team
Evans et al. (2021)
Culture and people
Jacobi and Brenner (2018)
Source: own
Tab. 3:
Key factors of digital transformation

--- [PAGE 11] ---
Business Administration and Management
97
2024, volume 27, issue 2, pp. 87–107, DOI: 10.15240/tul/001/2024-2-006
of advanced information technologies in order 
to change the attitudes, feelings, opinions, be-
haviour and performance of individuals, groups 
and organisations. Furthermore, e-leadership 
does not change the basis of business; rather, 
technology helps to  realise business. Also, 
some authors treat e-leadership and digital 
leadership as synonyms. Secondly, the  ana-
lysed literature provides a  concise definition 
of  digital leadership that blurs the  distinction 
between e-leadership and digital leadership. 
Thirdly, the results show that e-leadership and 
digital leadership are not synonyms, suggest-
ing that digital leadership is much broader 
than e-leadership, as  e-leadership primarily 
uses technology to support existing business. 
Digital leadership is an  important component 
of achieving the goal of digitally enabled busi-
ness model, digital organisations, and manage-
ment of employees (Eberl & Drews, 2021).
Digital leadership entails the ability to direct 
resources and utilise information communica-
tion technologies to  achieve the  organisation’s 
goals, significantly contributing to organisational 
performance (Suryadi Muslim & Setyono, 2024). 
Furthermore, the leadership required to achieve 
digital transformation can be identified by 
the  strategic leadership of  digitalisation, which 
involves leaders’ ability to create a clear and un-
derstandable vision for the digitalisation process 
as well as the ability to implement the strategy 
in  order to  achieve the  digital transformation 
(Engesmo & Panteli, 2021). Digital leadership 
is a combination of a transformational leadership 
Steps/dimensions of digital  
transformation
Van Tonder et al. 
(2020)
Gaffley and Pelser 
(2021)
Evans et al. 
(2021)
Jacobi and Brenner 
(2018)
Peter et al. 
(2020)
Andriole 
(2020)
Install digital leadership
✓
✓
✓
Development of new products/services and/or 
digitalisation of existing ones
✓
Development of employees’ digital competences
✓
✓
Digitalisation of customer platforms (channels)
✓
Transforming the user experience (customers, 
partners, workforce)
Identifying and acquiring the necessary resources for 
incorporating digital technologies
✓
Digitalisation of business processes
✓
✓
Changing/modifying the organisation – structure, 
incentives and culture
✓
✓
Digitalisation of existing capabilities
✓
Building a digital strategy
✓
✓
✓
✓
Creating cross-functional teams
✓
✓
Building stronger ties with stakeholders
✓
Collecting digital knowledge and experience at 
the organisational level
✓
Creation and measurement of key performance 
areas KPAs
✓
Source: own
Tab. 4:
Steps/dimensions of digital transformation

--- [PAGE 12] ---
Business Administration and Management
98
2024, volume 27, issue 2, pp. 87–107, DOI: 10.15240/tul/001/2024-2-006
style and the use of digital technology (Mihardjo 
&  Rukmana, 2019), or  even a  combination 
of  digital competencies and digital culture (Mi-
hardjo et al., 2019). Digital leadership can also be 
defined as the complete transformation of busi-
ness operations, as  well  as the  enhancement 
of organisational performance in specific areas 
through the application of technology across all 
aspects of business (Arabiun et al., 2024).
Values, skills and behaviour of  leaders 
are crucial in  directing and leading organisa-
tional development processes (Zivkovic, 2022). 
Taking into account the  role of  leadership in 
the  process of  digital transformation, starting 
with authors that emphasise the exclusive re-
sponsibility for digital transformation success 
lies with top management (Abbu et  al., 2022; 
Kontic & Vidicki, 2018; McCarthy et al., 2021; 
Sow &  Aborbie, 2018), the  research results 
indicate that digitally mature organisations sup-
port agile principles to  a  much greater extent 
such as transparent and open communication 
regarding digital projects and draw and gen-
erate new ideas based on  communication 
Source
Characteristics of leadership
Karakose et al. (2021)
Use of technology, managerial skills, individual skills
Zivkovic (2022)
Vision, innovation, flexibility, understanding of digital technologies, 
collaboration, empowerment, multiple intelligences, continuous 
learning, experimentation
Guzmán et al. (2020)
Cognitive skills, interpersonal skills, strategic skills
Gilli et al. (2023)
Cooperation, strategic thinking, team leadership skills, customer 
orientation, communication skills
Imran et al. (2021) 
Adaptability, data-driven decision-making, understanding new digital 
technologies, risk taking ability, vision, empowerment, failing fast
Schiuma et al. (2022)
Mentor, pragmatist, catalyst, communicator, righteous, facilitator
Schiuma et al. (2021)
Righteous, dreamer, builder, charismatic, bright, generous
Abdallah et al. (2021)
Flexibility, diversified knowledge, priority and results focus, ownership 
and responsibility
Bygstad et al. (2017)
Deep employee participation, leadership that leverages 
employee knowledge
Cortellazzo et al. (2019)
Digital skills, human skills, change initiation, problem solving
Cuya and Bayona-Oré (2022) Communication knowledge, technological knowledge
Eberl and Drews (2021)
Visionary, digital literacy, cooperation, adaptability, motivation
Imran et al. (2021)
Digital vision, digital knowledge, empowerment, management 
of diverse teams, risk taking
Larjovuori et al. (2018)
Strong vision and clear goals, commitment and investment, leading 
cultural changes, coaching, promoting participation, customer 
orientation, collaboration and partnership
McCarthy et al. (2021)
Digital architect, digital strategist, digital culturalist, customer centrist, 
business process optimiser, digital workplace landscaper, data 
advocate, organisational agilist
Mihardjo et al. (2019)
Communication, computing, content, telecommunications
Noonpakdee et al. (2020)
Business, digital technology, leadership, process, change (strategy)
Source: own
Tab. 5:
Competencies/skills/characteristics of digital leaders

--- [PAGE 13] ---
Business Administration and Management
99
2024, volume 27, issue 2, pp. 87–107, DOI: 10.15240/tul/001/2024-2-006
with clients, suppliers and business partners 
to  a  much greater extent. Digitally mature or-
ganisations also have leaders who have a high 
level of  education, exhibit entrepreneurial 
behaviour, and foster digital transformation. 
In  conclusion, leaders in  digitally mature or-
ganisations contribute significantly to  digital 
transformation. Overcoming negative percep-
tions of organisational digital transformation is 
possible by adopting new trends in developing 
the  skills of  employees, especially leaders 
(Sousa & Rocha, 2019). The successful leader 
in the  digital age is one who has leadership 
skills (Mihardjo et  al., 2019), a  mindset that 
adapts to  digital transformation, and is able 
to recognise and seize the opportunity to be in-
formed, make timely decisions in order to adjust 
strategy when risky situations arise, contribut-
ing significantly to  the  organisation’s optimal 
development (Hai et al., 2021).
Tab. 5 presents a list of the most common 
competencies of digital leadership that are cited 
in the  analysed papers as research results. 
However, a conclusion can be found that there 
is  no  single conceptual framework of  digital 
leadership competencies, which are not unified 
(Wahyuningsih & Asri, 2024).
According 
to 
previous 
studies, 
digi-
tally mature organisations differ from digi-
tally developing organisations when it comes 
to leadership competencies. As a result, lead-
ership competencies play an  important role 
in the development and success of the digital 
transformation process, particularly the combi-
nation of digital and human skills (Cortellazzo 
et  al., 2019). One  of  the  key competencies 
of a leader in the digital era is trust (Savolainen, 
2018), which can be the  basis of  a  separate 
leadership style. Digital transformation requires 
a  new form of  leadership (Kohnke, 2017), 
while innovations in  digital leadership are set 
as a new type of support in the form of digital 
innovations (Nurhidayati &  Ratnasari, 2021; 
Wasono & Furinto, 2018) of the business model 
(Yopan et al., 2022). In order to achieve digital 
leadership, there are three leadership styles 
–  administrative leadership, adaptive leader-
ship, and enabling leadership, on the one hand, 
and four platforms –  an  adoption platform, 
a learning platform, an innovation platform, and 
a system and business platform – on the other 
(Tanniru et al., 2018).
Digital leadership enabled business model 
by:  i)  transforming the  role, skills, and style 
of the digital leader; ii) realising a digital organ-
isation, including governance, vision, values, 
structure, culture, and decision processes; 
and iii)  adjusting management, virtual teams, 
knowledge, and communication and collabo-
ration on the  individual level (Eberl &  Drews, 
2021). In  the digital age, leadership is clearly 
becoming a recognised leadership style based 
on  two dimensions that are balanced. Firstly, 
it  is characterised by  a  behavioural perspec-
tive and a  focus on the  human aspects and 
teamwork of the organisation, but on the other 
hand, it  is characterised by  a  strong focus 
on  innovation and digital technology adoption 
(Oberer & Erkollar, 2018; Weber et al., 2022), 
which is affected by  digital transformation 
(Panshin et al., 2021). 
Leaders in  today’s organisations need 
to  ask a  few key questions (Ko  et  al., 2022): 
How will the  development of  digital technolo-
gies and business models affect organisations 
in the  future? How well do  we  understand 
the power of digitalisation that determines our 
present and are we capable of making effective 
choices about how to change it? How to lead 
the transformation of the company, and develop 
the necessary organisational capabilities?
Successful digital transformation begins 
with a  change in  mindset among employees, 
leadership, and throughout all levels of the or-
ganisation. These changes lead to  a  cultural 
shift that enables the organisation to be agile 
and ready to take risks. Organisations that initi-
ate this process with a focus solely on technol-
ogy often find themselves disappointed with 
the  results (Kane, 2019). It  is also important 
to highlight that ineffective leadership is the pri-
mary cause of  digital transformation failure 
(Aditya et al., 2021). In the information systems 
research, top management support is often 
regarded as a positive phenomenon essential 
to  successful digital transformation, including 
the  implementation of  information systems 
associated with organisational, operational, 
and strategic changes (Alieva & Powell, 2023; 
Elbanna &  Newman, 2022; Gudergan et  al., 
2021; Gurkan et al., 2020; Wrede et al., 2020).
Conclusions and discussion
Organisations today are more or less affected 
by  digital transformation. Generally, the  au-
thors agree that digital transformation is not 
a  one-time project, but rather a  process that 
manifests itself in different ways and at different 

--- [PAGE 14] ---
Business Administration and Management
100
2024, volume 27, issue 2, pp. 87–107, DOI: 10.15240/tul/001/2024-2-006
intensities. Without management, digital trans-
formation will happen spontaneously in the or-
ganisation, but to achieve the desired results, 
it  must be monitored and managed. There 
is no doubt that digital transformation is tech-
nologically based, but the emphasis should not 
be solely on technology. Digital transformation 
is often associated with the following technolo-
gies: social media, the internet of things, mo-
bility, big data and analytics, cloud computing, 
artificial intelligence and blockchain. The main 
factors enabling digital transformation include 
(among others) technologies. A customer-cen-
tric approach and an  effective digital strategy 
that includes, among other things, the  digital 
ecosystem, or, extending beyond the traditional 
boundaries of the organisation are essential.
The literature does not offer a generic and 
generally accepted definition of digital strategy. 
This is due to the fact that digital transforma-
tion takes a different form in different organisa-
tions, and it  is viewed differently by  experts. 
The following characteristics can be attributed 
to digital transformation according to the litera-
ture review: digital transformation is a continu-
ous process of changing business processes; 
digital transformation includes the  creation 
of  new or the  modification of  existing busi-
ness models; digital transformation is more 
than the  implementation of  new technologies; 
digital transformation includes new digital 
technologies that enable improvements and/
or transformation of business processes; digital 
transformation is  a  customer-centric mecha-
nism that enables continuous improvements; 
digital transformation includes the  following 
technologies among others: social media, inter-
net of things, mobility, big data and analytics, 
cloud computing, artificial intelligence, block-
chain, and cloud computing.
Despite the fact that digital transformation 
can take place spontaneously within organ-
isations, it  needs to  be managed profession-
ally. The management must have well-defined 
paths, or  road maps, for leading the  digital 
transformation effectively. A strategic approach 
to  digital transformation is very important. 
Digital transformation challenges must first be 
identified within the organisation. Limited infra-
structure, a lack of digital skills among employ-
ees, management’s inability to  adapt, a  lack 
of resources to integrate digital transformation, 
organisational culture, a lack of clear plan, and 
employee resistance all contribute to the chal-
lenges of digital transformation. It is essential 
to identify the challenges of digital transforma-
tion, take measures to  overcome them, and 
analyse the  key factors of  digital transforma-
tion. There are numerous actions that must 
be carried out simultaneously, starting with 
Fig. 2:
Framework of digital transformation
Source: own
Identifying the challenges of digital transformation
 Limited infrastructure
 Lack of skills
 Not adapted management, lack of 
knowledge to lead digital transformation
 Lack of resources to incorporate digital 
technologies
Initiating actions to overcome the challenges of digital transformation
 Culture in an organization
 Lack of a clear, industry-oriented 
plan
 Employee resistance
new

--- [PAGE 15] ---
Business Administration and Management
101
2024, volume 27, issue 2, pp. 87–107, DOI: 10.15240/tul/001/2024-2-006
developing a  digital strategy, installing digital 
leadership, and creating and measuring key 
performance areas (Fig. 2).
All of the above supports the position that 
leadership (people, strategy, leadership, busi-
ness processes and technology) is the  fun-
damental component of  digital transformation 
(Abbu et al., 2022; Abdallah et al., 2021; Gri-
gore &  Coman, 2018). Leadership and digital 
transformation are closely related, which starts 
with a leader with possessing visionary thinking, 
agility, an  understanding of  the  value of  data, 
data-driven decision-making, knowledge of strat-
egy, and a willingness to embrace change and 
changes in culture and networking (Larjovuori 
et al., 2018; Philip et al., 2023).
The readiness of an organisation for trans-
formation can be determined by  a  number 
of  factors. From the  position of  practical and 
academic views, it is concluded that organisa-
tions in this process require not only individual 
commitments, such as executive directors, but 
also teams of  competent managers, who will 
take responsibility for the success of the digital 
transformation process. Whether they succeed 
or fail depends greatly on their ability to build 
leadership trust and apply it for transformation. 
Digital transformation research suggests that 
leaders create a roadmap for the transformation 
process so as to know where they want their 
organisations to be in three to five years. A chief 
executive officer (CEO) plays a very important 
role in the transformation process, and manag-
ers and leaders will face significant challenges 
in the  future (Cortellazzo et  al., 2019; Zeike 
et  al., 2019). Changing the  way an  organisa-
tion thinks has a big impact on leadership and 
management (Evans et al., 2021).
Digital transformation brings significant chal-
lenges when it comes to managerial compete­
ncies. In  order to  improve business efficiency 
and introduce digital innovations, digital tech-
nologies require new competencies that must 
be combined with existing ones (Henderikx 
& Stoffers, 2022; Pihlajamaa et al., 2021), since 
the  development of  higher levels of  digital 
transformation is far more related to the charac-
teristics of the management than to the charac-
teristics of the organisation (Porfírio et al., 2021).
A  key requirement for the  positive deve­
lopment of  the  change process is  a  change 
in  leadership style, which managers realise 
is necessary. Study results indicate that man-
agers need to  remove themselves from their 
personal comfort zones in order to learn a new 
way of  behaving and implement changes. 
To address possible uncertainties (and poten-
tial fears) on the part of employees, managers 
believe it will be helpful to define a clear vision 
that will enable the  new culture of  leadership 
to flourish (Sokolovic et al., 2022). On the other 
hand, they propose specific goals that can be 
achieved with AI in leadership and culture and 
indicate the personal use of new technologies.
Contribution, limitations and sugges-
tions for future research. Both practitioners 
and researchers can benefit from a  clearer 
definition of  digital transformation. This pro-
posed framework can serve as a starting point 
for digital transformation research, both for 
researchers and for organisations managing 
digital transformation. In  establishing training 
requirements and recruiting adequate employ-
ees, HR management can utilise the proposed 
competencies list. There are certain limitations 
in the  conducted systematic literature review. 
Only two, albeit the largest, citation databases 
were searched, and only papers in English were 
identified. The  established framework should 
be verified and expanded through empirical 
research (Gudergan et al., 2021), due to a lack 
of  empirical research that addresses the  rela-
tionship between digital leadership and digital 
transformation process (Müller at al., 2024). Both 
HR management and experts who are familiar 
with and lead digital transformations in  organ-
isations should empirically verify the  identified 
competencies. Future research should focus on 
the relationship between digital leadership and 
organisational performance (Abbu et al., 2022), 
as well as the development of the digital maturity 
assessment model, which comprises a  variety 
of  dimensions, although most of  them cover 
technology, people, and strategy. Furthermore, 
future research should also analyse companies 
with a high level of digital transformation maturity 
and identify the  characteristics of  leaders that 
enabled this maturity and the degree of imple-
mentation of the digital workplace.
References
Abbu, H., Fleischmann, D., & Gopalakrish-
na,  P.  (2021). The  case of digital transforma-
tion in grocery business: A  conceptual model 
of digital grocery ecosystem. In  Proceedings 
of 2021 IEEE International Conference on 

--- [PAGE 16] ---
Business Administration and Management
102
2024, volume 27, issue 2, pp. 87–107, DOI: 10.15240/tul/001/2024-2-006
Engineering, Technology and Innovation (ICE/
ITMC) (pp. 1–9). IEEE. https://doi.org/10.1109/
ice/itmc52061.2021.9570219
Abbu,  H., Mugge,  P., Gudergan,  G., Hoe-
born, G., & Kwiatkowski, A. (2022). Measuring 
the human dimensions of digital leadership 
for successful digital transformation: Digital 
leaders can use the authors’ digital leadership 
scale to assess their own readiness and ability 
to accelerate digital transformation. Research-
Technology Management, 65(3), 39–49. https://
doi.org/10.1080/08956308.2022.2048588
Abdallah, Y. O., Shehab, E., & Al-Ashaab, A. 
(2021). Towards managing digital transforma-
tion in manufacturing industry: Theoretical 
framework. In  M.  Shafik &  K.  Case (Eds.), 
Advances in manufacturing technology XXXIV 
(pp. 21–26). IOS Press. https://doi.org/10.3233/
atde210006
Aditya, B. R., Ferdiana, R., & Kusumaward-
ani,  S.  S. (2021). Categories for barriers to 
digital transformation in higher education: 
An  analysis based on literature. International 
Journal of Information and Education Technol-
ogy, 11(12), 658–664. https://doi.org/10.18178/
ijiet.2021.11.12.1578
Alieva, J., & Powell, D. J. (2023). The sig-
nificance of employee behaviours and soft 
management practices to avoid digital waste 
during a  digital transformation. International 
Journal of Lean Six Sigma, 14(1), 1–32. https://
doi.org/10.1108/ijlss-07-2021-0127
AlNuaimi, B. K., Kumar Singh, S., Ren, S., 
Budhwar,  P., &  Vorobyev,  D. (2022). Master-
ing digital transformation: The nexus between 
leadership, agility, and digital strategy. Journal 
of Business Research, 145, 636–648. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2022.03.038
Alshehab, A., Alfozan, T., Gaderrab, H. F., 
Alahmad, M. A., & Alkandari, A. (2022). Iden-
tifying significant elements of the digital trans-
formation of organizatios in Kuwait. Indonesian 
Journal of Electrical Engineering and Computer 
Science, 26(1), 318. https://doi.org/10.11591/
ijeecs.v26.i1.pp318-325
Andriole,  S. J. (2020). The  hard truth 
about soft digital transformation. IT  Profes-
sional, 22(5), 13–16. https://doi.org/10.1109/
mitp.2020.2972169
Arabiun,  A., Tajpour,  M., &  Zahedi,  M.  R. 
(2024). The  effect of digital leadership on the 
performance of businesses: The  mediating role 
of organizational entrepreneurship. International 
Journal of Human Capital in Urban Management, 
9(1), 17–28. https://doi.org/10.22034/IJHCUM. 
2024.01.02
Boneva,  M. (2018). Challenges related 
to the digital transformation of business com-
panies. In  O.  Dvoulety,  M.  Lukes, &  J.  Misar 
(Eds.), In Proceedings of The 6th International 
Conference Innovation Management, Entre-
preneurship and Sustainability (pp.  101–114). 
OECONOMICA PUBLISHING HOUSE.
Braojos, J., Weritz, P., & Matute, J. (2024). 
Empowering organisational commitment through 
digital transformation capabilities: The  role of 
digital leadership and a continuous learning en-
vironment. Information Systems Journal, 12501. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/isj.12501
Brown,  N., &  Brown,  I. (2019). From digital 
business strategy to digital transformation – How: 
A systematic literature review. In Proceedings of 
the South African Institute of Computer Scientists 
and Information Technologists 2019 (No.  13, 
pp. 1–8). Association for Computing Machinery. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3351108.3351122
Bygstad, B., Aanby, H.-P., & Iden, J. (2017). 
Leading digital transformation: The  Scandina-
vian way. In Nordic contributions in IS research 
(pp.  1–14). Springer International Publishing. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-64695-4_1
Carcary,  M., Doherty,  E., &  Conway,  G. 
(2016). A dynamic capability approach to digi-
tal transformation: A focus on key foundational 
themes. In P. Silva, A. Guerreiro, & R. Quares-
ma (Eds.), Proceedings of the 10th  European 
Conference on Information Systems Manage-
ment (pp. 20–28). Academic Conferences Ltd.
Carvalho, J., Pires, H., Borges, A. P., Viei-
ra, E., & Monteiro, M. (2023). Digital leadership: 
Characteristics, challenges. And opportunities. 
In A. M. Even & B. Christiansen (Eds.), Enhanc-
ing employee engagement and productivity in 
the post-pandemic multigenerational work-
force (pp.  204–218). IGI Global. https://doi.
org/10.4018/978-1-6684-9172-0.ch010
Cortellazzo,  L., Bruni,  E., &  Zampieri,  R. 
(2019). The  role of leadership in a  digitalized 
world: A  review. Frontiers in Psychology, 10. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2019.01938
Criado-Perez,  C., Shinkle,  G.  A., Höller-
er, M. A., Sharma, A., Collins, C., Gardner, N., 
Hank Haeusler,  M., &  Pan,  S. (2022). Digital 
transformation in the Australian AEC  in-
dustry: Prevailing issues and prospective 
leadership thinking. Journal of Construction 
Engineering and Management, 148(1). https://
doi.org/10.1061/(asce)co.1943-7862.0002214

--- [PAGE 17] ---
Business Administration and Management
103
2024, volume 27, issue 2, pp. 87–107, DOI: 10.15240/tul/001/2024-2-006
Cuya, M., & Bayona-Oré, S. (2022). From 
e-government to digital transformation: Leader-
ship. In Lecture Notes in Networks and Systems 
(pp. 147–155). Springer Singapore. https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-981-16-2380-6_13
Danielsen,  A. V. (2020). Digital transfor­
mation and its potential effects on future 
management: Insights from an ETO  context. 
In B. Lalic, V. Majstorovic, U. Marjanovic, G. Ci-
eminski, & D. Romero (Eds.), Advances in produc-
tion management systems. Towards smart and 
digital manufacturing (Vol.  592, pp.  146–153). 
Springer International Publishing. https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/978-3-030-57997-5_18
Eberl, J. K., & Drews, P. (2021). Digital lead-
ership ‒ Mountain or molehill? A literature re-
view. In Innovation through information systems 
(pp. 223–237). Springer International Publishing. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-86800-0_17
Egor, P. (2020). Digital transformation of in-
dustrial companies: What is Management 4.0? 
In  Proceedings of 2020 The  11th  International 
Conference on E-Business, Management and 
Economics (pp.  131–138). ACM. https://doi.
org/10.1145/3414752.3414779
Elbanna,  A., &  Newman,  M. (2022). 
The bright side and the dark side of top manage-
ment support in digital transformation – A herme-
neutical reading. Technological Forecasting and 
Social Change, 175, 121411. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.techfore.2021.121411
Elidjen,  D., Mihardjo,  L.  W.  W., &  Rukma-
na, R. A. N. (2019). Intervening role of innovation 
management on relationship between digital 
leadership and dynamic capability accelerated 
by collaboration. International Journal of Innova-
tion, Creativity and Change, 6(1), 249–264.
Engesmo,  J., &  Panteli,  N. (2021). Digital 
leaders and the transformation of the IT func-
tion. Scandinavian Journal of Information Sys-
tems, 33(1), 4.
Evans, N., Qureshi, A., & Miklosik, A. (2021). 
Digital enterprise transformation: Lessons 
learnt from expert experience. In Proceedings 
of the European Conference on Knowledge 
Management (pp. 268–275). EKCM.
Fachrunnisa, O., Adhiatma, A., Lukman, N., 
& Ab. Majid, M. N. (2020). Towards SMEs’ digi-
tal transformation: The role of agile leadership 
and strategic flexibility. Journal of Small Busi-
ness Strategy, 30(3), 65–85.
Florek-Paszkowska,  A., Ujwary-Gil,  A., 
& Godlewska-Dzioboń, B. (2021). Business in-
novation and critical success factors in the era 
of digital transformation and turbulent times. 
Journal of Entrepreneurship, Management 
and Innovation, 17(4), 7–28. https://doi.org/ 
10.7341/20211741
Gaffley, G., & Pelser, T. G. (2021). Develop-
ing a digital transformation model to enhance 
the strategy development process for leader-
ship in the South African manufacturing sector. 
South African Journal of Business Management, 
52(1). https://doi.org/10.4102/sajbm.v52i1.2357
Gierlich-Joas, M. (2021). Identifying and over-
coming future challenges in leadership: The role 
of  IS in facilitating empowerment. In  F.  Ahle-
mann,  R.  Schütte, &  S.  Stieglitz (Eds.), Inno-
vation Through Information Systems (Vol.  48, 
pp. 537–553). Springer International Publishing. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-86800-0_38
Gilli, K., Nippa, M., & Knappstein, M. (2023). 
Leadership competencies for digital transfor-
mation: An exploratory content analysis of job 
advertisements. German Journal of Human 
Resource Management: Zeitschrift Für Per-
sonalforschung, 37(1), 50–75. https://doi.org/ 
10.1177/23970022221087252
Grigore,  A.  M., &  Coman,  A. (2018). 
The  hourglass effect: Leadership transforma-
tions in the digital era. In  Proceedings of the 
12th  International Management Conference: 
Management Perspectives in the Digital Era 
(pp. 603–610). Editura ASE.
Gudergan, G., Mugge, P., Kwiatkowski, A., 
Abbu, H., Hoeborn, G., & Conrad, R. (2021). Dig-
ital leadership – Which leadership dimensions 
contribute to digital transformation success? 
In  Proceedings of 2021  IEEE  International 
Conference on Engineering, Technology and 
Innovation (ICE/ITMC) (pp. 1–8). IEEE. https://
doi.org/10.1109/ice/itmc52061.2021.9570231
Guinan,  P.  J., Parise,  S., &  Langowitz,  N. 
(2019). Creating an innovative digital project 
team: Levers to enable digital transformation. 
Business Horizons, 62(6), 717–727. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.bushor.2019.07.005
Gurkan, G. C., Cıftcı, G., & Ozyurt, B. (2020). 
Mutual relationships between digital transforma-
tion and leadership.  In  U.  Hacioglu (Ed.), Ad-
vances in e-business research (pp.  311–331). 
IGI  Global. https://doi.org/10.4018/978-1-7998-
1125-1.ch013
Guzmán, V. E., Muschard, B., Gerolamo, M., 
Kohl, H., & Rozenfeld, H. (2020). Characteristics 
and skills of leadership in the context of Indus-
try  4.0. Procedia Manufacturing, 43, 543–550. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.promfg.2020.02.167

--- [PAGE 18] ---
Business Administration and Management
104
2024, volume 27, issue 2, pp. 87–107, DOI: 10.15240/tul/001/2024-2-006
Hai, T. N., Van, Q. N., & Thi Tuyet, M. N. 
(2021). Digital transformation: Opportunities and 
challenges for leaders in the emerging countries 
in response to COVID-19 pandemic. Emerg-
ing Science Journal, 5, 21–36. https://doi.org/ 
10.28991/esj-2021-sper-03
Hansen, A. M., Kraemmergaard, P., & Math-
iassen,  L. (2011). Rapid adaptation in digital 
transformation: A participatory process for en-
gaging IS and business leaders. MIS Quarterly 
Executive, 10(4), 175–185.
Henderikx, M., & Stoffers, J. (2022). An ex-
ploratory literature study into digital transforma-
tion and leadership: Toward future-proof middle 
managers. Sustainability, 14(2), 687. https://doi. 
org/10.3390/su14020687
Heracleous, L., & Gledhill, D. (2024). Why 
digital transformation may fail – And what can 
be done about it. The  Journal of Applied Be-
havioral Science, 60(1), 215–219. https://doi.
org/10.1177/00218863231176567
Imran,  F., Shahzad,  K., Butt,  A., &  Kan-
tola,  J. (2021). Digital transformation of in-
dustrial organisations: Toward an integrated 
framework. Journal of Change Management, 
21(4), 451–479. https://doi.org/10.1080/14697
017.2021.1929406
Jacobi,  R., &  Brenner,  E. (2018). How 
large 
corporations 
survive 
digitalization. 
In C. Linnhoff-Popien, R. Schneider, & M. Zad-
dach (Eds.), Digital marketplaces unleashed 
(pp. 83–97). Springer Berlin Heidelberg. https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-49275-8_11
Jayawardena, C. D. W., Albattat, A., & Jaha-
radak, A. A. (2020). Synthesis of digital transfor-
mation beyond technology perspective: Digital 
strategy, leadership & culture. Journal of Criti-
cal Reviews, 7(09), 349–357. https://doi.org/ 
10.31838/jcr.07.09.01
Kane,  G. (2019). The  technology fallacy: 
People are the real key to digital transformation. 
Research-Technology 
Management, 
62(6), 
44–49. https://doi.org/10.1080/08956308.2019. 
1661079
Karakose,  T., Polat,  H., &  Papadakis,  S. 
(2021). Examining teachers’ perspectives on 
school principals’ digital leadership roles and 
technology capabilities during the COVID-19 
pandemic. Sustainability, 13(23), 13448. https://
doi.org/10.3390/su132313448
Ko,  A., Fehér,  P., Kovacs,  T., Mitev,  A., 
& Szabó, Z. (2022). Influencing factors of digital 
transformation: Management or IT is the driv-
ing force? International Journal of Innovation 
Science, 14(1), 1–20. https://doi.org/10.1108/
ijis-01-2021-0007
Kohnke,  O. (2017). It’s not just about 
technology: The  people side of digitization. 
In G. Oswald & M. Kleinemeier (Eds.), Shaping 
the digital enterprise (pp. 69–91). Springer In-
ternational Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
978-3-319-40967-2_3
Kokolek, N., Jakovic, B., & Curlin, T. (2019). 
Digital knowledge and skills –  Key factors for 
digital transformation. In  Proceedings of the 
30th  International DAAAM Symposium 2019 
(pp.  0046–0053). DAAAM International Vi-
enna. 
https://doi.org/10.2507/30th.daaam.
proceedings.006
Kontić, L., & Vidicki, Đ. (2018). Strategy for 
digital organization: Testing a  measurement 
tool for digital transformation. Strategic Man-
agement, 23(1), 29–35. https://doi.org/10.5937/
straman1801029k
Kringelum, L. B., Holm, C. G., Holmgren, J., 
Friis, O., & Jensen, K. F. (2024). Digital transfor­
mation: Strategy comes first to lay the ground­- 
work. Journal of Business Strategy. https://doi.
org/10.1108/jbs-09-2023-0199
Kutnjak, A., Pihiri, I., & Furjan, M. T. (2019). 
Digital transformation case studies across 
industries –  Literature review. In  Proceed-
ings of 2019  42nd  International Convention 
on Information and Communication Technol-
ogy, Electronics and Microelectronics (MIPRO) 
(pp. 1293–1298). IEEE. https://doi.org/10.23919/ 
mipro.2019.8756911
Larjovuori,  R.-L., Bordi,  L., &  Heikkilä-
Tammi,  K. (2018). Leadership in the digital 
business transformation. In  Proceedings of 
the 22nd International Academic Mindtrek Con-
ference (pp.  212–221). ACM. https://doi.org/ 
10.1145/3275116.3275122
Lorentzen,  A.-C.  R. (2022). Digital trans-
formation as distributed leadership: Firing the 
change agent. Procedia Computer Science, 
196(2022), 245–254. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
j.procs.2021.12.011
Luo,  Y., Cui,  H., Zhong,  H., &  Wei,  C. 
(2023). Business environment and enterprise 
digital transformation. Finance Research Let-
ters, 57, 104250. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.frl. 
2023.104250
McCarthy, P., Sammon, D., & Alhassan, I. 
(2021). Digital transformation leadership char-
acteristics: A literature analysis. Journal of De-
cision Systems, 32(1), 79–109. https://doi.org/ 
10.1080/12460125.2021.1908934

--- [PAGE 19] ---
Business Administration and Management
105
2024, volume 27, issue 2, pp. 87–107, DOI: 10.15240/tul/001/2024-2-006
Mhlungu, N. S. M., Chen, J. Y. J., & Alke-
ma, P. (2019). The underlying factors of a suc-
cessful organisational digital transformation. 
SA Journal of Information Management, 21(1), 
52–72. https://doi.org/10.4102/sajim.v21i1.995
Mihardjo,  L. W. W., &  Rukmana,  R.  A. 
(2019). Dynamic capability, market orientation 
and innovation capability: The  role of digital 
leadership for Indonesia telecommunication 
firms in facing disruptive era. In  Proceedings 
of the International Conference on Indus-
trial Engineering and Operations Management 
(pp. 1218–1222). IEOM Society International.
Mihardjo,  L. W. W., Sasmoko,  S., Alams-
jah, F., & Elidjen, E. (2019). Digital leadership role 
in developing business model innovation and 
customer experience orientation in Industry 4.0. 
Management Science Letters, 9(11), 1749–1762. 
https://doi.org/10.5267/j.msl.2019.6.015
Müller,  S. D., Konzag,  H., Nielsen,  J.  A., 
&  Sandholt,  H.  B. (2024). Digital transforma-
tion leadership competencies: A  contingency 
approach. International Journal of Informa-
tion Management, 75, 102734. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2023.102734
Noonpakdee, W., Phothichai, A., Khunkorns-
iri, T., & Nuntree, A. (2020). CIO competency in 
digital era: A comparative study between gov-
ernment organisations and private enterprises. 
In  Proceedings of 2020 IEEE 7th International 
Conference on Industrial Engineering and Ap-
plications (ICIEA) (pp. 948–952). IEEE. https://
doi.org/10.1109/iciea49774.2020.9101988
Nurhidayati, & Ratnasari, S. W. (2021). Digi-
tal transformation of organisations: Perspectives 
from digital citizenship and spiritual innovative 
leadership.  In  L.  Barolli,  A.  Poniszewska-Ma-
randa, & T. Enokido (Eds.), Advances in intelligent 
systems and computing (pp. 485–489). Spring-
er International Publishing. https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/978-3-030-50454-0_50
Oberer,  B., &  Erkollar,  A. (2018). Lead-
ership  4.0: Digital leaders in the age of 
Industry 4.0. International Journal of Organiza-
tional Leadership, 7(4), 404–412. https://doi.org/ 
10.33844/ijol.2018.60332
O’Leary,  D. E. (2023). Digitization, digita-
lization, and digital transformation in account-
ing, electronic commerce, and supply chains. 
Intelligent Systems in Accounting, Finance and 
Management, 30(2), 101–110. https://doi.org/ 
10.1002/isaf.1524
Panshin,  I., Solovieva,  O., Kornilova,  O., 
& Eronin, V. (2021). The impact of digitalization 
on leadership. In E. G. Popkova & B. S. Sergi 
(Eds.), Modern Global Economic System: 
Evolutional Development vs. Revolutionary 
Leap (Vol.  198, pp.  1272–1278). Springer In-
ternational Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
978-3-030-69415-9_139
Paul,  J., Ueno,  A., Dennis,  C., Alama-
nos,  E., Curtis,  L., Foroudi,  P., Kacprzak, A., 
Kunz, W. H., Liu, J., Marvi, R., Nair, S. L. S., 
Ozdemir,  O., Pantano,  E., Papadopoulos,  T., 
Petit, O., Tyagi, S., & Wirtz, J. (2024). Digital 
transformation: A  multidisciplinary perspective 
and future research agenda. International Jour-
nal of Consumer Studies, 48(2), 13015. https://
doi.org/10.1111/ijcs.13015
Peter, M. K., Kraft, C., & Lindeque, J. (2020). 
Strategic action fields of digital transformation: 
An exploration of the strategic action fields of 
Swiss SMEs and large enterprises. Journal of 
Strategy and Management, 13(1), 160–180. 
https://doi.org/10.1108/jsma-05-2019-0070
Philip,  J., &  Gavrilova Aguilar,  M. (2022). 
Student perceptions of leadership skills neces-
sary for digital transformation. Journal of Educa-
tion for Business, 97(2), 86–98. https://doi.org/ 
10.1080/08832323.2021.1890540
Philip, J., Gilli, K., & Knappstein, M. (2023). 
Identifying key leadership competencies for 
digital transformation: Evidence from a  cross-
sectoral Delphi study of global managers. 
Leadership & Organization Development Jour-
nal, 44(3), 392–406. https://doi.org/10.1108/
lodj-02-2022-0063
Pihlajamaa, M., Malmelin, N., & Wallin, A. 
(2021). Competence combination for digital 
transformation: A study of manufacturing com-
panies in Finland. Technology Analysis & Stra-
tegic Management, 35(10), 1355–1368. https://
doi.org/10.1080/09537325.2021.2004111
Porfírio,  J. A., Carrilho,  T., Felício,  J.  A., 
& Jardim, J. (2021). Leadership characteristics 
and digital transformation. Journal of Busi-
ness Research, 124, 610–619. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.jbusres.2020.10.058
Reis, J., & Melão, N. (2023). Digital trans-
formation: A  meta-review and guidelines for 
future research. Heliyon, 9(1), e12834. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2023.e12834
Salume, P. K., Barbosa, M. W., Pinto, M. R., 
& Sousa, P. R. (2021). Key dimensions of digital 
maturity: A study with retail sector companies in 
Brazil. RAM. Revista de Administração Macken-
zie, 22(6). https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-6971/
eramd210071

--- [PAGE 20] ---
Business Administration and Management
106
2024, volume 27, issue 2, pp. 87–107, DOI: 10.15240/tul/001/2024-2-006
Savolainen, T. (2018). Trust as leadership 
resource and skill in the services and tourism 
business: Views on managing intangibles in the 
digital era. In Proceedings of International Con-
ference on Tourism Research (pp.  129–133). 
ACAD.
Schiuma, G., Schettini, E., & Santarsiero, F. 
(2021). How wise companies drive digital trans-
formation. Journal of Open Innovation: Technol-
ogy, Market, and Complexity, 7(2), 122. https://
doi.org/10.3390/joitmc7020122
Schiuma, G., Schettini, E., Santarsiero, F., 
&  Carlucci,  D. (2022). The  transformative 
leadership compass: Six competencies for 
digital transformation entrepreneurship. Inter-
national Journal of Entrepreneurial Behavior 
& Research, 28(5), 1273–1291. https://doi.org/ 
10.1108/ijebr-01-2021-0087
Schwaferts,  D., &  Baldi,  S. (2018). Digital 
transformation management and digital business 
development. In  R. Dornberger (Ed.), Studies 
in systems, decision and control (pp. 147–159). 
Springer International Publishing. https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-319-74322-6_10
Schwarzmüller,  T., Brosi,  P., Duman,  D., 
&  Welpe,  I.  M. (2018). How does the digital 
transformation affect organisations? Key themes 
of change in work design and leadership. Man-
agement Revue, 29(2), 114–138. https://doi.org/ 
10.5771/0935-9915-2018-2-114
Sokolović,  B., Katić,  I., Grubić-Nešić,  L., 
Ivanišević, A., & Pavlović, A. (2022). The spe-
cific role of transformational leadership in the 
organizational culture of service organiza-
tions. Anali Ekonomskog Fakulteta u  Sub-
otici, (47), 131–145. https://doi.org/10.5937/
aneksub2247131s
Solberg, E., Traavik, L. E. M., & Wong, S. I. 
(2020). Digital mindsets: Recognizing and 
leveraging individual beliefs for digital trans-
formation. California Management Review, 
62(4), 105–124. https://doi.org/10.1177/000812 
5620931839
Sousa,  M.  J., &  Rocha,  Á. (2019). Digital 
learning: Developing skills for digital transforma-
tion of organizations. Future Generation Com-
puter Systems, 91, 327–334. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.future.2018.08.048
Suryadi,  S., Muslim, A.  Q., &  Setyono,  L. 
(2024). Exploring the nexus of digital leadership 
and digital literacy on higher education perfor-
mance: The role of digital innovation. European 
Journal of Educational Research, 13(1), 207–218. 
https://doi.org/10.12973/eu-jer.13.1.207
Tanniru,  M., Khuntia,  J., &  Weiner,  J. 
(2018). Hospital leadership in support of digital 
transformation. Pacific Asia Journal of the As-
sociation for Information Systems, 10(3), 1–24. 
https://doi.org/10.17705/1pais.10301
Tekic,  Z., &  Koroteev,  D. (2019). From 
disruptively digital to proudly analog: A holistic 
typology of digital transformation strategies. 
Business Horizons, 62(6), 683–693. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.bushor.2019.07.002
Trenerry,  B., Chng,  S., Wang,  Y., Su-
haila, Z. S., Lim, S. S., Lu, H. Y., & Oh, P. H. 
(2021). Preparing workplaces for digital trans-
formation: An integrative review and framework 
of multi-level factors. Frontiers in Psychology, 
12. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2021.620766
Tu, Y., & Chi, M. (2020). Exploring the digital 
transformation based on big data with ubiqui-
tous internet of everything. In  Proceedings of 
Nineteenth Wuhan International Conference on 
E-Business (pp.  131–136). UNIV CALGARY 
PRESS.
Tungpantong, C., Nilsook, P., & Wannapir-
oon, P. (2021). A conceptual framework of fac-
tors for information systems success to digital 
transformation in higher education institutions. 
In Proceedings of 2021 9th International Confer-
ence on Information and Education Technol-
ogy (ICIET) (pp. 57–62). IEEE. https://doi.org/ 
10.1109/iciet51873.2021.9419596
Ubiparipovic, B., Matkovic, P., & Pavlicevic, V. 
(2023). Key activities of digital business transfor-
mation process. Strategic Management, 28(1), 
33–40. https://doi.org/10.5937/straman2200016u
Urs, N., Nisioi, I., & Roja, A. (2023). Leading 
the way: How leaders facilitate digital transfor-
mation in organizations. In Proceedings of the 
Central and Eastern European eDem and eGov 
Days 2023 (pp.  145–152). ACM. https://doi.
org/10.1145/3603304.3603352
Van Tonder, C., Schachtebeck, C., Nieuwen-
huizen, C., & Bossink, B. (2020). A framework 
for digital transformation and business model 
innovation. Management, 25(2), 111–132. 
https://doi.org/10.30924/mjcmi.25.2.6
Venkatesh, R., Mathew, L., & Singhal, T. K. 
(2019). Imperatives of business models and dig-
ital transformation for digital services providers. 
International Journal of Business Data Com-
munications and Networking, 15(1), 105–124. 
https://doi.org/10.4018/ijbdcn.2019010107
Vial, G. (2019). Understanding digital trans-
formation: A  review and a  research agenda. 
The Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 

--- [PAGE 21] ---
Business Administration and Management
107
2024, volume 27, issue 2, pp. 87–107, DOI: 10.15240/tul/001/2024-2-006
28(2), 118–144. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsis. 
2019.01.003
Wahyuningsih, S. H., & Asri, R. W. P. (2024). 
The  conceptual structure and thematic evolu-
tion of the digital leadership knowledge base. 
Multidisciplinary 
Reviews, 
7(4), 
2024073. 
https://doi.org/10.31893/multirev.2024073
Wasono,  L., &  Furinto, A. (2018). The  ef-
fect of digital leadership and innovation man-
agement for incumbent telecommunication 
company in the digital disruptive era. Interna-
tional Journal of Engineering &  Technology, 
7(2.29), 125–130. https://doi.org/10.14419/ijet.
v7i2.29.13142
Weber,  E., Büttgen,  M., &  Bartsch,  S. 
(2022). How to take employees on the digital 
transformation journey: An experimental study 
on complementary leadership behaviors in man-
aging organizational change. Journal of Busi-
ness Research, 143, 225–238. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.jbusres.2022.01.036
Weritz, P., Braojos, J., & Matute, J. (2020). 
Exploring the antecedents of digital transforma-
tion: Dynamic capabilities and digital culture 
aspects to achieve digital maturity. In  AMCIS 
2020 Proceedings (pp.  1–10). Association for 
Information Systems.
Wrede,  M., Velamuri,  V.  K., &  Dauth,  T. 
(2020). Top managers in the digital age: Explor-
ing the role and practices of top managers in 
firms’ digital transformation. Managerial and 
Decision Economics, 41(8), 1549–1567. https://
doi.org/10.1002/mde.3202
Xiao,  Y., &  Watson,  M. (2019). Guid-
ance on conducting a  systematic literature 
review. Journal of Planning Education and 
Research, 
39(1), 
93–112. 
https://doi.org/ 
10.1177/0739456x17723971
Yopan, M., Kasali, R., Balqiah, T. E., & Pas-
aribu, M. (2022). The role of digital leadership, 
customer orientation and business model in-
novation for IoT companies. International Jour-
nal of Business, 27(2), 1–22. https://doi.org/ 
10.55802/IJB.027(2).007
Zaoui,  F., &  Souissi,  N. (2020). Roadmap 
for digital transformation: A  literature review. 
Procedia Computer Science, 175, 621–628. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2020.07.090
Zeike,  S., Bradbury,  K., Lindert,  L., 
& Pfaff, H. (2019). Digital leadership skills and 
associations with psychological well-being. In-
ternational Journal of Environmental Research 
and Public Health, 16(14), 2628. https://doi.
org/10.3390/ijerph16142628
Zhu, X., Ge, S., & Wang, N. (2021). Digital 
transformation: A  systematic literature review. 
Computers & Industrial Engineering, 162, 107774. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2021.107774
Zimmermann,  A., Schmidt,  R., &  Sand-
kuhl, K. (2019). Multiple perspectives of digital 
enterprise architecture. In  Proceedings of the 
14th  International Conference on Evaluation 
of Novel Approaches to Software Engineer-
ing (pp.  547–554). SCITEPRESS –  Science 
and Technology Publications. https://doi.org/ 
10.5220/0007769105470554
Zivkovic, S. (2022). Inspiring digital transfor-
mation: An  integrative leadership competency 
framework. Ekonomska Misao i Praksa, 31(1), 
237–254. https://doi.org/10.17818/emip/2022/ 
1.11
Zulu,  S.  L., &  Khosrowshahi,  F. (2021). 
A  taxonomy of digital leadership in the con-
struction industry. Construction Management 
and Economics, 39(7), 565–578. https://doi.org/ 
10.1080/01446193.2021.1930080
