--- [PAGE 1] ---
Transdisciplinary Competencies for the Future:  
Bridging the Gap Between Emotional Intelligence, Digital Literacy,  
Inner Development Goals, and Employability 
 
 
 
 
 
ABSTRACT1 
 
Transformative potential of the knowledge economy of the XXI 
century, establishment of networked society, emergency 
digitization due to the pandemic and wartime measures have 
imposed elaborate interdisciplinary and interoperable demands 
on the marketability of Liberal Arts skills and competences, upon 
entering the workforce.  
This study examines the gap between transdisciplinary future 
skіlls hіghlіghted іn the World Economіc Forum’s (WEF) 
"Future of Jobs" reports and those sought by learners іn 
Coursera’s Global Skіlls іndex. The emphasis lies on the role of 
Core skills combined with the Inner Development Goals (IDGs) 
framework in bridging these gaps. The proposed strategy 
roadmap links IDGs with the demands for future skills and 
Humanity-focused Higher Education (HiEd), besides, it provides 
actionable recommendations for HiEd staff, business schools and 
policymakers. By combining Inner Development with 
Leadership Skills and Digital Skills Programs in HiEd we may 
have a hope to stimulate employability for the AI age both for 
individuals' inner growth and collaboration/co-creation skills in 
teams and larger communities in a turbulent job market of 2025-
2050. 
The study results disclose the comprehensive review of dynamics 
of the digital skills development and application to construe 
interdisciplinary, AI-interoperable competencies of students and 
educators in Europe through the span of educational activities in 
the time-frame of the pandemic emergency digitization measures 
of 2020-2021 and wartime emergency digitization measures of 
2022-2024 in Ukraine (including AI-enhanced communication as 
a staple of transdisciplinary education as of 2023).  
The paper introduces a model of AI-interoperable digital skills 
for education and professional application in different social 
spheres. The survey analysis is used to evaluate the dimensions 
of interdisciplinarity, informed by the interoperability of soft 
skills, professional communication skills, and digital skills across 
contrasting frameworks of e-competence, Inner Development 
Goals, professional digital communication, and professional 
training.  
 
1 Peer-editor: Olena Tupakhina, Dr. Hab., Zaporizhzhya National University, Vice 
Rector, Ukraine 
Keywords: Inner Development Goals (IDGs), Interoperability, 
Transdisciplinarity, EQ, AI-literacy, Digital literacy, Digital 
skills, Employability, Higher Education 
 
1.  INTRODUCTION 
 
Transformative shifts in the knowledge economy of the XXI 
century, Industry 4.0/5.0, Society 5.0 development and 
elaboration of networked society, emergency digitization due to 
wartime measures and the establishment of the AI Age have 
imposed pressing revisions onto interdisciplinary and cross-
sectorial job market demands of Liberal Arts university 
graduates’ skillsets, upon entering the workforce. This, in turn, 
stipulates reevaluation of the interdisciplinary approaches to 
comprehensive professional competences in education and 
application.  
The pandemic induced amplified digitalization measures in the 
higher education sphere, informed by the need to take quick 
comprehensive action in order to achieve the overarching result 
to transform educational scenarios into interdisciplinary digital, 
blended, and hybrid frameworks. Taking into account the context 
of the erupted military intervention on Ukraine in February 2022, 
and the ensuing information warfare in various digital 
environments (social media, news coverage, digital 
communications), the specific value of the learning outcomes 
and outputs is allocated to the digitally enhanced educational 
communication as a tool of the internationally broadcast strife of 
Ukraine for freedom and sovereignty.  
The rapid advancement of technology and evolving economic 
landscapes have reshaped the global job market, prompting 
organizations like the World Economic Forum (WEF) to analyze 
and project future skills demands through their "Future of Jobs" 
reports. Meanwhile, platforms such as Coursera's Global Skills 
Index provide a snapshot of the skills learners are actively 
pursuing today. Within this context, the Inner Development 
Goals (IDGs) framework has emerged as a key movement, 
aiming to cultivate the inner capacities necessary to meet the 
challenges of sustainable development and global complexity. As 
universities prepare students to navigate an increasingly dynamic 
 
 Rusudan MAKHACHASHVILI 
Borys Grinchenko Kyiv Metropolitan University,  
Bulvarno-Kudryavska-st., 18/2,  Kyiv, Ukraine
Kyiv School of Economics,
Mykoly Shpaka-str., 3, 02000, Kyiv, Ukraine 
Yuliya SHTALTOVNA
Hochschule Fresenius, 
Jägerstraße 32, 10117, Berlin, Germany;  
Proceedings of the 29th World Multi-Conference on Systemics, Cybernetics and Informatics (WMSCI 2025)
341
https://doi.org/10.54808/WMSCI2025.01.341
ISBN: 978-1-950492-85-5
ISSN: 2771-0947

--- [PAGE 2] ---
and complex world, the integration of Emotional Intelligence 
(EQ) into curricula becomes vital. The future of education stands 
at the intersection of technology, sustainability, and human 
development. Here, smart campuses—equipped with AI, virtual 
reality (VR), and data analytics —are revolutionizing learning 
environments, offering tailored educationa l experiences that 
support emotional and cognitive growth [22]. Such technological 
advancements for more adaptive educational systems necessitate 
a shift in the role of educators from traditional knowledge 
providers to facilitators of essential competencie s in both the 
digital age and sustainability [37]. 
The study objective is to introduce a comprehensive 
international perspective and data -corroborated research on 
multi-disciplinary, digital and AI literacies for pre/in -service 
teachers in Europe. That dir ects the inquiry to the aim of 
exploring the critical intersection of Emotional Intelligence (EQ), 
Inner Development Goals (IDGs), and future employability 
within higher business education frameworks. Specifically, the 
study aims to identify and analyze gaps between the future skills 
demanded by employers, highlighted in the World Economic 
Forum’s "Future of Jobs" reports —and the skills prioritized by 
learners, as revealed by Coursera’s Global Skills Index.  
Through integrating the IDGs framework, this pape r seeks to 
propose actionable strategies and recommendations for higher 
education institutions, educators, and policymakers. Ultimately, 
it advocates for embedding emotional intelligence and inner 
development within curricula to effectively bridge identifi ed 
skills gaps, thereby preparing students holistically for the 
challenges of the digital and AI-driven era. 
The study design includes the following steps:  
- A systematic literature review and comparative content 
analysis with consistent transdisciplinary s kills 
benchmarking, drawing explicitly on authoritative 
white papers published by the World Economic Forum 
(WEF), specifically the "Future of Jobs" reports from 
the years 2016, 2018, 2020, and 2023  [31], and 
Coursera’s Global Skills Reports  published annually 
from 2018 to 2023 [33]; 
- The modelling of interoperability between various 
competency principles, derivative of twenty -first-
century skills [4; 7; 9]  and projected digital  and AI  
literacy requirements for education across core digital 
literacy frameworks (European e -Competence 
Framework [13], UNESCO revised ICT Competence 
framework for educators  [29] and European 
Commission Digital Competence Framework: 
DigComp 2.2 [12]);  
- The survey method application for diagnostic analysis 
of different  digital literacy components and 
dimensions, as well as digital skills implementation, 
used to assess the parameters of efficiency of 
transforming real -life linguistic education practices 
into the digital and hybrid format; 
- The identification of the interoperability between 
various groups of applied digital /AI skills and soft 
skills, instrumental to develop interdisciplinary 
professional competence. 
The inquiry employs the combination of mixed methods [3, 8] – a 
proportional arrangement of quantitative and qualitative inquiry 
to assess in -depth aspects of subjective and individual quality 
estimation of digital distant, hybrid and AI-enhanced learning.  
The survey structure comprised of 16 complex diagnostic 
questions (multiple choice, criteria comparison and Likert scale 
score types), divided into the following categories: 1) questions 
on overall assessment of digital  and AI  literacy level  in the 
framework of wartime emergency; 2) questions on diagnostics of 
specialists according to the established frameworks of digital/AI 
competencies and e-skills in the professional field ; 3) questions 
on diagnostics of interoperability of linguistic / communicative / 
soft professional and digital skills. 
The inquiry is conducted through the consistent study of 
digitization measures and outcomes for Arts and Sciences 
education programs in Ukraine, beginning with the timespan of 
the Covid-19 pandemic and transcending into the crisis paradigm 
of active warfare in different regions of Ukraine, across different 
education levels. 
The inquiry's main findings disclose global event horizon and 
paradigm shifts  [30] in the interdisciplinary trends of digital 
education in the pandemic timeframe and through the emergency 
of the warzone in Ukraine and in the EU; transformative changes 
of the network society and education as an interdisciplinary, 
multi-lingual socio -cultural institution in the digital age; 
experiences, challenges, digital advances and specific national 
gains in quality assurance of Humanities education in the 
sustainable and emergency paradigms.  
The study results disclose the comprehensive review of dynamics 
of the digital skills development and application to construe 
interdisciplinary, AI-interoperable competencies of students and 
educators in Ukraine through the span of educational activities in 
the time-frame of the pandemic emergency digitization measures 
of 2020-2021 and wartime emergency digitization measures of 
2022-2025 in Ukraine (including AI-enhanced communication as 
a staple of transdisciplinary education as of 2023).  
 
2.  FINDINGS 
 
Conceptual Grid of the Inquiry 
The following grid of groundwork concepts is applied to profile 
the digitization of higher education in the pandemic and wartime 
timeframes:  
• TRANSDISCIPLINARITY;  
• INTEROPERABILITY;  
• DIGITAL LITERACY;  
• COMPLEX SKILLS;  
• AI-INTEROPERABLE DIGITAL SKILLS. 
The meaning of TRANSDISCIPLINARITY is synthesized for 
the purpose of this study as an agglomeration of two or more 
fields of knowledge into one scope/goal of study, inquiry or 
activity [2; 6; 14; 17; 20]. 
The concept of  INTEROPERABILITY is disclosed  across 
different approaches [19; 26; 27] as a characteristic of an object, 
product or system, that allows its interface to be comprehensible, 
to work with other objects, products or systems. 
A model of soft skills paradigms and digital AI-literacy 
frameworks INTEROPERABILITY in digital education is 
devised and corroborated through several iterations of surveys in 
the timespan of emergency digitization of 2022-2025: 
1) European E -competence Framework Guideline (European 
Commission, 2021) [13], customized according to European 
Professional Competence Framework, accommodates the 
following soft skills in terms of digital competence 
requirements for vocational activity in FLE: service 
orientation; attention to detail, learning strategies, 
leadership and social influence, cognitive creativity and 
flexibility, coordination and time -management; human 
resources management; 
2) UNESCO AI Competence Frameworks (teachers/students) 
(UNESCO, 2024) [29], customized for pre-service teachers 
of foreign languages, accommodates the following types of 
soft skills in terms of digital competence requirements: 
Proceedings of the 29th World Multi-Conference on Systemics, Cybernetics and Informatics (WMSCI 2025)
342

--- [PAGE 3] ---
collaboration, team -work, problem-solving, reasoning and 
ideation.  
3) Digital Competence 2.2 framework (European 
Commission, 2023) [12] for general public, accommodates 
the following soft skills in terms of digital competence 
requirements for efficient digital citizenship: 
Communication and collaboration, creativity and 
adaptability, learning and innovation, trustworthiness, 
emotional intelligence, complex problem solving; 
4) AI and Digital Transformation Competency Framework 
(UNESCO, 2024) [28] for public sector, accommodates the 
following soft skills in terms of digital competence 
requirements: service orientation; attention to detail, 
learning strategies, leadership a nd social influence, 
cognitive creativity and flexibility; 
5) Skills in the Age of AI framework (WEF, 2024  [31] for 
workforce accommodates the following soft skills in terms 
of digital competence requirements:  communication, 
critical thinking, creativity, emotional intelligence, 
adaptability, and decision-making; 
6) Europe’s Digital Decade policy program (Digital Dec ade 
2030) [11] for countries accommodates the following soft 
skills in terms of digital competence requirements: 
communication; content creation; critical thinking; lifelong 
learning. 
This study core argument revolves around transdisciplinary 
integration o f emotional intelligence and transformative skills 
within educational frameworks, prioritizing competencies such 
as resilience, empathy, well-being, and sustainability [38]. These 
priorities are directly aligned with the IDG framework, which 
emphasizes the development of inner capacities to empower 
students to navigate a VUCA (Volatility, Uncertainty, 
Complexity, and Ambiguity) world effectively  [43, 44] . As 
concerns over mental health and sustainability become more 
pressing, the imperative fo r universities to embed these 
competencies within curricula and campus life is clear, ensuring 
a holistic approach to student development [34, 35]. 
Therefore, this study dives into the transformative potential of 
SMART Higher Education Institutions (HEIs) and international 
management and business schools in shaping a more inclusive 
and democratized educational landscape for a 5.0 society. These 
institutions advocate for interconnected, ethically informed, and 
networked learning practices that not only keep pace with 
technological changes but also remain grounded in sustainable 
and inclusive development goals. By adopting such a 
comprehensive approach, educational systems can better prepare 
graduates to be future -ready leaders who are equipped to drive 
positive change in society. It underscores the importance of both 
inner and outer sustainability within educational ecosystems [36, 
41, 42]. 
The paper explores processes of change in sustainability 
education at the individual, collective, and system levels, 
drawing on  [40], and underscores the importance of resilience 
and creativity in climate resilience education, focusing on 
empowering students to transition from climate anxiety to 
resilience and regeneration  [46]. By integrating these insights 
with metamodernist frameworks [45] the study advocates for an 
educational approach that balances technical skills with 
emotional management, inner development, and sustainability -
oriented competencies [44], essential for thriving in the digital 
metamodern era.  The articl e analyzes the correlation between 
future skills needs identified by the WEF, learning patterns on 
Coursera, and the IDGs framework, aiming to uncover gaps and 
propose strategies for better alignment. 
Interoperability for e -skills and AI skills  is ensured by the 
communicative nature [18] of interdisciplinary skills in general. 
The core cross -sectorial domain that is referential for primary 
skills (social skills, emotional intellect, collaboration, 
communication, digital literacy), necessary for educational goals 
achievement, is estimated to be COMMUNICATION, DIGITAL 
LITERACY, GEN-AI LITERACY in its turn is defined as the 
ability to use information and communication technologies to 
find, evaluate, create, and communicate information, requiring 
both cognitive and technical skills [5; 10; 28]. Digital literacy and 
e-skills assessment in the educational context has been subject to 
academic reevaluation due to the objective conditions of the 
pandemic global lockdown measures and has been approached 
through different lens: regional variation in digital literacy level 
development in education [ 16]; technological challenges for 
development of soft skills [21]; challenges and opportunities of 
e-learning in higher education [1]. 
The study premise is based on identification of various 
competency principles, derivative of 21 st century skills [4; 7; 9; 
11; 24; 31] for education stakeholders and projected digital and 
AI literacy requirements.  
The study identifies and categorizes critical competencies 
highlighted consistently or emerging across the years in both sets 
of reports, creating a robust analytical framework for assessing 
patterns such as skill emergence, co nsistency, or decline. 
Subsequently, these identified skills gaps are explicitly aligned 
with the Inner Development Goals (IDGs) framework, aligning 
competencies within its five dimensions —Being, Thinking, 
Relating, Collaborating, and Acting . This detailed  alignment 
enables the study to propose specific curricular strategies for 
integrating Emotional Intelligence (EQ) and inner developmental 
competencies, through the integration of EQ and IDGs into 
higher education curricula is proposed through Kotter’s 8 -Step 
Change Framework.  
The study bridges identified transdisciplinary gaps in student 
employability in a rapidly evolving complex and digitized 
professional environment of the multilateral polarization that is 
coming after the era of globalization. 
The analysis reveals alignment in some technical areas between 
WEF's projected skills and Coursera learners' focus, but 
significant gaps persist in cognitive and soft skills. Employers 
highly value skills like Analytical Thinking, Complex Problem-
Solving, and Active Learning , which are underemphasized in 
current learning trends. Similarly, crucial soft skills like 
Emotional Intelligence , Resilience, and Adaptability are also 
underrepresented, despite their growing importance. 
The IDGs address these transdisciplina ry gaps by focusing on 
inner development alongside technical skills. The Thinking 
dimension of the IDGs promotes cognitive abilities like 
analytical thinking and problem -solving, while the Being and 
Relating dimensions include emotional intelligence, empat hy, 
and resilience. By incorporating the IDGs into education and 
professional development, a balanced skill set that aligns with 
current and future job market demands can be achieved. 
Educational institutions and organizations can bridge the skills 
gap by integrating the IDGs into curricula, teaching methods, and 
assessments. This involves embedding IDG competencies into 
course objectives, promoting self -awareness and collaboration, 
and developing evaluation methods to measure both personal 
growth and soft skills. Organizations can adopt the IDGs to 
enhance professional development and corporate social 
responsibility with cultures that value inner growth and 
sustainable practices. 
A complex skill is generally understood as a skill requiring to 
process lots of information and make lots of decisions 
Proceedings of the 29th World Multi-Conference on Systemics, Cybernetics and Informatics (WMSCI 2025)
343

--- [PAGE 4] ---
simultaneously [23; 3 2]. That way, a comprehensive 
correspondence between 21 st century skills framework , 
Competences 2020 framework [22 ] and the newly introduced 
Global Skills 2025 f ramework [ 31] ha s been devised and 
upgraded. 
The transdisciplinary integration between the corresponding 
skillsets across various frameworks could be referred to the 
following key domains of human activity [23]:  
- COMMUNICATION; 
- COGNITIVE ACTIVITY; 
- PERSONAL INTERACTION; 
- SOCIAL ACTIVITY; 
- HEURISTICS; 
- AI-INTERACTION. 
 
Interoperability of Core Skills and Digital Skills in Education 
The future landscape of work will place a premium on cognitive 
skills, particularly creative and analytical thinking, as businesses 
navigate complex challenges. Self -efficacy skills are becoming 
increasingly vital, with employers seeking workers who are 
adaptable, resilient, and committed to lifelong learning. While 
some traditional skills may see a relative decline in impor tance, 
the need for technology literacy and ethical competencies is on 
the rise, driven by technological advancements and societal 
expectations. Industry-specific trends highlight the necessity for 
tailored skill development strategies to meet the evolving  
demands of different sectors. 
The World Economic Forum's Future of Jobs Reports 2023-2024 
highlight a significant emphasis on socio -emotional skills, 
referred to as "Attitudes" within the Global Skills Taxonomy. 
Across various industries, approximately two-thirds of the skills 
that companies identify as priorities for workforce development 
fall under the Skills, Knowledge, and Abilities cluster (often 
termed "hard skills"), while the remaining one -third consists of 
Attitudes. 
Socio-emotional skills  are becoming increasingly prioritized, 
with attitudes reaching parity with technical skills in training 
programs. Leadership and social influence  have emerged as 
key strategic priorities for businesses between 2023 and 2027, 
surpassing their current ranki ng as core worker skills and 
emphasizing their growing role in business success and 
workforce adaptability.  
Trends in skills strategies show a balance between collaboration 
and self-efficacy skills, with many sectors emphasizing working 
with others, such as empathy, active listening, and leadership, 
over self-management. However, teaching and mentoring skills 
are receiving minimal attention in most training programs, 
suggesting a potential gap in nurturing interpersonal guidance 
roles. 
The approach to self -efficacy skills varies, with some sectors 
focusing on resilience, flexibility, and agility,  while others 
prioritize curiosity and lifelong learning, reflecting the need for 
continuous personal and professional growth. Motivation and 
self-awareness are als o emphasized, promoting personal 
development and growth management.  
Ethical thinking  shows varied levels of prioritization across 
sectors, with some focusing more on upskilling employees in 
these areas. Though global citizenship is not widely prioritized, 
environmental stewardship is increasingly recognized as a key 
component in skill strategies, often with a higher perceived future 
importance than current demand. This shift reflects the rising 
need for green skills and the growing trend toward Green Digital 
economy. 
To gain further insights into these evolving trends, we will 
analyze the top skills reported from 2018 to 2023. A heat map 
categorizing skills as Consistent, Emerging, Rising, Declining, or 
Re-emerging will help visualize changes in learner int erests and 
priorities (Table 1): 
 
 
Table 1. Hotmap Analysis of the Top Skills in Global Skills Reports 
Proceedings of the 29th World Multi-Conference on Systemics, Cybernetics and Informatics (WMSCI 2025)
344

--- [PAGE 5] ---
Subsequently, mapping of core Global  Skills across the  IDG 
Framework is feasible across such dimensions (Fig. 1): 
The Being dimension aligns with WEF's emphasis on personal 
resilience, emotional intelligence, and active learning. Resilience 
and Stress Tolerance through Inner Peace and Self-Awareness, 
enabling individuals to manage stress and adapt to change. An 
Openness and Learning Mindset promotes Active Learning, 
encouraging continuous personal growth. 
The Thinking dimension directly addresses the cognitive skills 
highlighted by the WEF. Critical Thinking and Complexity 
Awareness enhance Analytical Thinking and Complex Problem-
Solving abilities. Perspective Skills and Sense -Making 
contribute to Creativity and Innovation by allowing individuals 
to integrate diverse viewpoints and generate novel solutions. 
The Relating dimension integrates Emotional Intelligence and 
enhances Leadership through Empathy, Compassion, and a sense 
of Connectedness. By cultivating these qualities, individuals are 
better equipped to understand and influence others positively. 
The Collaborating dimension emphasizes effective teamwork 
and social interaction, aligning with WEF's focus on Leadership 
and Social Influence. Communication Skills and an Inclusive 
Mindset enhance Emotional Intelligence and the ability to lead 
diverse teams. 
The Acting dimension supports proactive engagement and 
innovation. Creativity and Courage enable individuals to take 
initiative and drive change, resonating with WEF's emphasis on 
Creativity and Initiative. Agency and Perseverance facil itate 
continuous learning and adaptation, essential for technological 
proficiency. 
 
Figure 1: Global Skills Mapping Across IDGs Framework 
 
 
Furthermore, the study stipulates that digital interoperability for 
Arts and Humanities skills is ensured by the communicative 
nature of transdisciplinary skills. The core cross-sectorial domain 
that is referential for primary skills (social skills, emotional 
intellect, collaboration, communication, Digital and AI-literacy), 
necessary for educational goals achievement, is 
COMMUNICATION. 
Given the nature of increasingly digitalized context of foreign 
languages education and communicative application (“the 
Technospheric shift” [30] and the Age of AI [15; 23]), it is 
suggested to consider the different  types of information source 
and information destination (human and machine / computer / 
program, accordingly) in the structure of the groundwork  
Communication model (Cf. Claude Shannon [25]), when 
communication is approached as the core factor of 
interoperability of source and target knowledge and application 
domains – both for human and machine interactive purposes (Fig. 
2): 
 
Proceedings of the 29th World Multi-Conference on Systemics, Cybernetics and Informatics (WMSCI 2025)
345

--- [PAGE 6] ---
 
 
Figure 2: AI-interoperable Communication Cycle in Education 
 
 
Therefore, an INTEROPERABLE DIGITAL SKILL for the 
purpose of this study is defined as a rhizomatic (virally acquired) 
capability of mutually informed manipulation of digital data, 
tools, and communication formats, acquired institutionally, 
intuitively or on the peer-to-peer basis. 
Subsequently, the interoperable digital skills for AI-enhanced 
professional activity are modeled across the skills domains of 
professional activity (as determined by the different competence 
frameworks) and core domains of professional literacy (Fig. 3): 
 
 
Figure 3: Interoperability of Core Skills and Digital/AI-Literacy Frameworks 
 
 
Proceedings of the 29th World Multi-Conference on Systemics, Cybernetics and Informatics (WMSCI 2025)
346

--- [PAGE 7] ---
The study aims to identify, among other parameters, challenges 
for actual and underdeveloped cross -sectorial and 
transdisciplinary skills (hard, technical and soft), that participants 
of the educational process encountered through the pandemic and 
warfare emergency digital education measures. 
 
IDG-interoperable Digital and AI-proof Skills for Education 
A sizable sample of 372 respondents total had been polled across 
the wartime timeframe (2022-2025). 
Diagnostics of specialists in Arts and Sciences according to 
European e-Competence Framework and estimation of digital 
skills for professional application  - allowed to evaluate of the 
professional e-competence dimensions among the following: A. 
PLAN, B. BU ILD, C. RUN, D. ENABLE and E. MANAGE 
professional processes with the help of digital  and AI-powered 
tools and services. 
Within the given dimensions the following top scoring 
professional goals were estimated: 1) Planning of professional 
processes (with the  help of AI) (A) – 61% of respondents; 2) 
Monitoring of professional activity ( with the help of AI ) (C) – 
50% of respondents; 3) Provision (facilitation) of professional 
activity ( with the help of AI ) (D) – 47% of respondents. 
According to the prioritized professional goals, the followings 
dominant professional e -competence dimensions are identified: 
1) to PLAN; 2) to RUN; 3) to ENABLE professional processes 
with the help of AI (for communication and education). 
The priority types of dominant digital skills for professional 
application according to the European e-competence framework 
are estimated as 1) ICT and Gen AI  user skills  – 75% of 
Gen AI USER SKILLS: Skills for the effective application of 
ICT systems and devices; Skills to apply ICT systems and GPT 
models as tools in support of one’s workflow; User skills to use 
of common software tools and of specialized AI tools supporting 
business functions within professional area of communicative 
use. 
Diagnostics of digital skills for pre-service and in-service 
teachers according to UNESCO AI Competence Frameworks 
(teachers/students) – allowed to identify 1) professional activity 
goals for digital and AI skills application and 2) student-oriented 
goals of pre-service teachers for digital and AI skills application. 
The priority (scoring 5-4 on the evaluation scale) professional 
activity goals for digital and AI skills application are estimated 
by the stakeholders as: 1) to improve one’s own teaching skills 
with digital tools and AI tools (65% of respondents). 2) to 
develop learning materials using digital and AI-powered tools 
(60% of respondents); 3) to understand the role of digital 
technologies in language generation and AI-mediated 
communication (59% of respondents); 4) to develop curricula 
using digital and AI-powered tools (53% of respondents). 
The priority (scoring 5-4 on the evaluation scale) student oriented 
goals for digital and AI skills application are estimated as: 1) to 
help learn independently via digital and AI tools (66% of 
respondents); 2) to help to become effective participants in civil 
society through digital and AI tools (61% of respondents); 3) to 
teach to solve problems with digital and AI tools (59% of 
respondents); 4) to teach to think critically using digital and AI 
tools (54% of respondents); 5) to teach to implement different 
types of communicative activities (oral, written, listening, 
dialogue, monologue) – 54%  respondents; 6) to teach to work in 
a team / organize collaboration with AI-powered tools (53% of 
respondents);  
It bears pointing out that the dominant students-oriented goals for 
digital and AI skills application correspond to the generic soft 
skills, identified across various frameworks: 1) Learning and 
innovation; 2) human resources management, social intellect; 3) 
adaptability and resilience; 4) problem solving and critical 
thinking; 5) collaboration and communication (Fig. 4). 
 
Figure 4: IDGs-interoperable Core skills in Digital Education Frameworks 
respondents; 2)  ICT and Gen AI practitioner skills – 74 /% of 
respondents. 
According to the Likert Scale assessment ICT and Gen AI user 
skills get a top ranking of 4 (46% of respondents) and ICT and 
Gen AI practitioner skills get a top ranking of 5 (37% of 
respondents). 
The following specific digital skills for professionals correspond 
to the prioritized types: 1) ICT and Gen AI PRACTITIONER 
SKILLS: Skills for language and communication research; Skills 
for strategic planning of communication; Skills for 
communicative management; Skills for consulting; 2) ICT and 
Proceedings of the 29th World Multi-Conference on Systemics, Cybernetics and Informatics (WMSCI 2025)
347

--- [PAGE 8] ---
Therefore, AI-Proof and AI -Ready Skills are central to 
navigating an AI -driven world. AI-Proof Skills , like empathy, 
compassion, complex problem-solving, and ethical judgment, are 
inherently human and challenging for AI to replicate. These skills 
emphasize social dynamics and moral reasoning. AI-Ready Skills 
enable effective collaboration with AI technologies, requiring a 
learning mindset, sense -making, creativity, and innovation to 
harness AI's strategic potential. 
The IDG framework enhances human-AI colla boration by 
equipping individuals with creativity, ethical awareness, and 
agency to use AI innovatively while navigating its moral 
implications. Aligning with WEF's and the Global Skills Index 
focus on cognitive, emotional, and social skills, the IDGs 
cultivate both AI -proof and AI -ready competencies. This 
approach bridges traditional skills gaps by integrating inner 
development alongside technical proficiency, preparing 
individuals for success in an AI-integrated workforce. 
 
3.  CONCLUSIONS 
 
The warfare emergency e-learning measures and underlying shift 
in the digital economy of Europe towards the rise of AI informed 
the comprehensive modelling of interoperability between various 
competency principles, derivative of the soft marketable skills 
and projected digital literacy requirements across core digital 
literacy frameworks.  
Digital domain, digital communication and digital , AI -
empowered, literacy are assessed as interoperable parameters 
across different e -competence frameworks, that inform 
underlying interdisciplinarity of Arts and Sciences  education in 
the timespan of the wartime emergency e-learning measures. 
Evaluation of digital and AI-interoperable skills for professional 
application allowed to determine the priority dimensions of 
professional e -competence as to plan, to run and to enable  
professional processes with the help of AI -powered tools and 
services. The types of dominant digital skills for professional 
application of are identified as ICT and AI user skills and ICT 
and AI practitioner skills.  The demands of digital and knowledge 
economy job market are not met by the Arts and Sciences  
curriculum design, as the e-business skills are evaluated scoring 
lowest in priority by stakeholders. 
The dominant AI-interoperable skills  acquired are: 
communication, emotional intellect, creativity, problem solving 
and innovation. Digital and AI literacy features as a prominent 
interoperable skill, facilitating the application of other types of 
soft skills of the communicative nature. 
To ef fectively integrate inner development and emotional 
intelligence (EQ) within SMAR universities  for AI -powered 
economy, both curricula and educators' skillsets must undergo 
strategic change. 
For Individuals, embracing the Inner Development Goals 
(IDGs) framework through university programs can strengthen 
inner capacities in tandem with technical skills. Universities 
should embed EQ, adaptability, and self -awareness into both 
curricular and extracurricular activities. This integration could 
involve modules on  self-reflection, mindfulness, and 
collaborative learning experiences that promote resilience and 
adaptability. Such an approach not only enhances students' 
ability to thrive in a technology-driven workforce but also equips 
them with critical soft skills f or ethical decision -making, 
teamwork, and personal growth. Encouraging self -directed 
learning and peer mentoring can further deepen these capacities. 
For Organizations, particularly within academic institutions, the 
IDG framework should be adopted as a cor e component of 
faculty development. Training programs focused on cultivating 
empathy, creativity, and critical thinking among teachers are 
crucial. Educators must shift from traditional teaching models to 
becoming facilitators of learning, guiding students in developing 
both their technical and inner capacities. Workshops on 
developing emotional intelligence, practicing inclusive teaching 
methods, and a growth mindset can support educators in 
nurturing well -rounded, innovative, and ethically responsible 
graduates. Promoting a culture of continuous professional 
development within universities ensures that educators stay agile 
and effective as change agents. 
For Policymakers and Curriculum Designers , SMART 
universities must align their curricula with IDG princ iples by 
prioritizing holistic, learner-centered development. This requires 
a rethinking of current academic structures to incorporate EQ and 
inner development as foundational competencies, not just 
supplementary skills. Strategies might include project -based 
learning with a focus on real-world challenges that require ethical 
considerations, emotional self -regulation, and collaboration. 
Moreover, curriculum revisions should emphasize 
interdisciplinary learning, merging technical knowledge with 
socio-emotional competencies. A mindset of inner development 
among educators and students alike requires the curriculum of a 
transformative experience that prepares individuals to navigate 
the complexities of the digital era and emerging global challenges 
effectively. 
The perspective of the study is in scaling the inquiry to estimate 
the dimensions of digital and AI literacy formation for for 
different types of e -learning tools, as well as to diagnose 
interdisciplinary, AI-powered digitization trends across countries 
of Europe. 
 
 
The paper has been reviewed by Olena Tupakhina, Habilitated 
Doctor, Vice -Rector, Zaporizhzhya  National University, 
Ukraine. Empirical findings and theoretical procedures have 
been conducted under the auspices of Integrated Research 
framework of Romance and Germanic Philology Department of 
Borys Grinchenko Kyiv Metropolitan University Digital 
Transformative Linguistics And Cross -Cultural Communication 
(0123U102796), framework project COST Action CA21167 
UniDive: Universality, Diversity and Idiosyncrasy in Language 
Technology, framework project COST Action CA21114 CLIL: 
Network for Languages in Educa tion: Towards bi - and 
multilingual disciplinary literacies; COST Action CA23112 
COCAG: Critical perspectives on career and career guidance. 
The authors extend special acknowledgement to the Armed 
Forces of Ukraine for providing safety to complete this work. 
 
5.  REFERENCES 
 
[1] Al-Jardani, Khalid Salim, “E-Learning in Higher Education: 
Challenges and Opportunities”, International Journal of 
Innovation, Creativity and Change, 14 (11), 2020, pp. 58-
64. 
[2] Alvargonzález D. “Multidisciplinarity, “Interdisciplinarity, 
Transdisciplinarity, and the Science ’, International 
Studies in the Philosophy of Science, Vol. 25(4), 2011, pp. 
387-403. 
[3] Almalki, S., “Integrating Quantitative and Qualitative Data 
in Mixed Methods Research - Challenges and Benefits”, 
Journal of Education and Learning, 5(3), 2016, pp. 288-
296. 
[4] Abbott S., The Glossary of Education Reform. Retrieved 
from: http://edglossary.org/hidden -curriculum (accessed 
July 2020), 2013. 
4.  ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
Proceedings of the 29th World Multi-Conference on Systemics, Cybernetics and Informatics (WMSCI 2025)
348

--- [PAGE 9] ---
[5] American Library Association, Digital Literacy. Retrieved 
from: https://literacy.ala.org/digital-literacy, 2020. 
[6] Callaos N., Ma rlowe T., “Inter -Disciplinary 
Communication Rigor”.  Rigor and Inter-Disciplinary 
Communication: Intellectual Perspectives 
from Different Disciplinary  and Inter -Disciplinary 
Fields. TIDC, LLC, 2020, pp. 4-29.  
[7] Davies A., Fidler D. et al, Future Work Skills 2020 , 
Institute for the Future for University of Phoenix Rese arch 
Institute. Retrieved from: 
https://www.iftf.org/uploads/media/SR-
1382A_UPRI_future_work_skills_sm.pdf, 2011. 
[8] Dillman, D. A., Smyth, J. D., Christian, Leah Melani, 
Internet, Phone, Mail and Mixed -Mode Surveys: The 
Tailored Design Method , 4th edition. J ohn Wiley: 
Hoboken, NJ, 2014. 
[9] Dos Reis A., “To Be a (Blended) Teacher in the 21st 
Century - Some Reflections”, International Journal of 
Research in E-learning, 1(1), 2015, pp. 11-24. 
[10] DQ Global Standards Report, World’s first global 
standard for digital lit eracy, skills and readiness 
launched by the Coalition for Digital Intelligence.  
Retrieved from: https://www.dqinstitute.org/, 2019. 
[11] European Commission. Europe’s Digital Decade 2030 . 
Retrieved from:  https://digital-
strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/policies/europes-digital-decade, 
2024. 
[12] European Commission, Digital Competence 2.2. Retrieved 
from: https://ec.europa.eu/jrc/en/digcomp/digital -
competence-framework, 2024. 
[13] European Co mmission, European E -Competence 
Framework Guideline.   Retrieved from: 
https://www.ecompetences.eu/, 2024. 
[14] Frodeman R. (ed).  The Oxford Handbook of 
Interdisciplinarity (2 ed.), OUP, 2017. 
[15] Heim M., The Metaphysics of Virtual Reality.  LA: 
Westport Publishers, 1993. 278 p. 
[16] Gródek-Szostak, Z. , Suder, M., Piechaczek, A., Siguencia, 
L.O., “Assessment and Comparison of Digital Competences 
in Education for Selected European Countries”, European 
Research Studies Journal, 24(1), 2021, pp. 348-361. 
[17] Holbrook, J. Britt , "What is interdisciplinary 
communication. Reflections on the very idea of disciplinary 
integration", Synthese, Vol. 190  (11), 2013, pp. 1865 –
1879. 
[18] Hymes, Dell H., “Communicative competence”, 
Sociolinguistics: selected readings , Harmondsworth: 
Penguin., 1972, pp. 269–293. 
[19] Interoperability Working Group , Definition of 
Interoperability. Retrieved from: http://interoperability -
definition.info/en/, 2020.  
[20] Jacobs, J.A. & S. Frickel,  "Interdisciplinarity: a critical 
assessment", Annual Review of Sociology,  Vol. 35, 2009, 
pp. 43–65.  
[21] Liesa-Orús M., Latorre-Cosculluela C.,  Vázquez-Toledo S. 
and Sierra -Sánchez V., “The Technological Challenge 
Facing Higher Education Professors: Perceptions of ICT 
Tools for Developing 21st Century S kills”, Sustainability, 
12 (5339), 2020, pp. 2-14. 
[22] Makhachashvili R ., Semenist I.  “Transdisciplinary 
Communication as a Meta -Framework of Digital 
Education”, Proceedings of the 26th World Multi -
Conference on Systemics, Cybernetics and Informatics, 
WMSCI, 2022, 1, pp. 151–156. 
[23] Makhachashvili, R.  et al, “Interoperable Digital Skills for 
Foreign Languages Education in the COVID-19 Paradigm”, 
Proceedings of the 16th International Multi-Conference 
on Complexity, Informatics and Cybernetics: IMCIC , 
2025, pp. 262-266.  
[24] Makhachashvili, R., Semenist, I., “E-skills and digital 
literacy for foreign languages education: Student case study 
in Ukraine'', Proceedings of the 15th Multi-Conference on 
Computer Science and Information Systems , MCCSIS 
2021, 2021, pp. 3–14 .  
[25] Shannon, C. E., "A Mathematica l Theory of 
Communication", Bell System Technical Journal , 
Vol.  27 (3), 1948, pp. 379–423.   
[26] Slater, T.  "Cross-Domain Interoperability" , Network 
Centric Operations Industry Consortium - NCOIC. 
Retrieved from: https:// www.ncoic.org, 2013. 
[27] Slater, T.  "What is Interoperability?",  Network Ce ntric 
Operations Industry Consortium – NCOIC. Retrieved 
from: https:// www.ncoic.org, 2012.  
[28] UNESCO, AI and Digital Transformation Competency 
Framework, 2022. Retrieved from: 
https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000383325. 
[29] UNESCO, AI Competency Framework for Teachers.  
Retrieved from: https://www.unesco.org/en/articles/ai-
competency-framework-teachers, 2024. 
[30] Vernadsky V. Scientific thought as a planetary 
phenomenon. Academia, 1991. 
[31] World Economic Forum, The Future of Jobs Report. 
Retrieved from: 
http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_Future_of_Jobs_202
4.pdf, 2024. 
[32] Wulf G., Shea, G. “Principles derived from the study of 
simple skills do not generalize to complex skill learning” , 
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review , Vol. 9, 2002, pp. 185 –
211. 
[33] Coursera. “Global Skills Report 2023”, Coursera, 2023. 
Available at: https://www.coursera.org/gsi. 
[34] Disterheft A. “Nurturing a caring university: Exploring 
inner and outer sustainability for transformative change in 
higher education”, in Rotondo F. et al. (eds.), Sustainability 
in Higher Education: Strategies, Performance and 
Future Challenges, Springer, 2024, pp. 27–51. 
[35] Fathi K. Multi-Resilience - Development - Sustainability: 
Requirements for securing the future of societies in the 
21st century , Springer Fachmedien Wiesbaden, 
Wiesbaden, 2022. 
[36] Garcia-Alvarez M., Rekalde -Rodríguez I., Gil -Molina P. 
“No transition w ithout transformation: Educating 
sustainability”, in Filho W.L. et al. (eds.), Implementing 
the UN Sustainable Development Goals – Regional 
Perspectives, Springer, 2023, pp. 1–35.  
[37] Jakubik M., Beke J., Shtaltovna Y. “The role of universities: 
Enhancing stu dents' capabilities for work and life”, in 
Donald W.E. (ed.), Handbook of Research on Sustainable 
Career Ecosystems for University Students and 
Graduates, IGI Global, 2023, pp. 15–37. 
[38] Leigh S.A.J., Rivers C. “Reflect, Rethink, and Redesign: 
Responses to Pr ivilege in Management Education ”, 
Journal of Management Education , 2023, 47(1), pp. 3 –
10. 
[39] Makhachashvili R., Semenist I., Shtaltovna Y., Bakhtina A. 
“Soft skills and ICT tools for final qualification assessment 
in universities of Ukraine and India in COVID -19 
framework”, Psychology and Education, 2021, 58(2), pp. 
849–861. 
[40]  Pöllänen E., Osika W., Horwitz E.B., Wamsler C. 
“Education for sustainabilit y: Understanding processes of 
Proceedings of the 29th World Multi-Conference on Systemics, Cybernetics and Informatics (WMSCI 2025)
349

--- [PAGE 10] ---
change across individual, collective, and system levels”, 
Challenges, 2023, 14(1), pp. 5–24. 
[41] Shtaltovna Y. “Education environment democratization as a 
higher education development strategy”, Open 
Educational E -Environment of M odern University , 
2016, 2, pp. 273–282. 
[42] Shtaltovna Y. “The pursuit of democratization in education 
- Knowing where to go. Concept analysis for the correct use 
of the term ‘Democratization of Education’”, Open 
Educational E -Environment of Modern University , 
2018, 4, pp. 74–82. 
[43] Shtaltovna Y. “Mapping the academic landscape: A state -
of-the-art perspective on sustainability, inner development 
goals and higher education”, Business & Diplomacy 
Review, 2025, 1(1), pp. 46–62. 
[44] Shtaltovna Y., Rodriguez Carreon V., Li ndencrona F., 
Donald W.E. “Cognitive Skills within the Inner 
Development Goals (IDG) Framework: Empowering 
Sustainable Careers and Sustainable Development ”, GILE 
Journal of Skills Development, 2024, 4(1), pp. 74–94. 
[45] Shtaltovna, Y. “Rewriting the fut ure: How metamodern 
education can redefine society and leadership ”, GILE 
Journal of Skills Development, 2024, 4(2), pp. 112-121. 
[46] Wamsler C., Schäpke N., Fraude  C., Stasiak D., Bruhn T., 
Lawrence M., Schroeder H., Mundaca L. “Enabling new 
mindsets and transformative skills for negotiating and 
activating climate action: Lessons from UNFCCC 
conferences of the parties”, Environmental Science & 
Policy, 2020, 112, pp. 227–235. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Proceedings of the 29th World Multi-Conference on Systemics, Cybernetics and Informatics (WMSCI 2025)
350